This is
Seeing trouble all day.
I can see it, but swap. Yeah.
Looking forward.
All ready to go. Are they, so we've got, uh,
Natasha Archer, is that correct?
Um, online
Morning, Natasha.
Welcome to the, um, primary production select committee
for these hearings.
Um, you have, uh, 10 minutes, so
what you do with your time's up to you.
And if you'd like questions, um, please leave time
for those, so away you go.
Okay. Hi, my name is Stacie Archer
and I oppose the bill to end Greyhound racing.
Um, I am a third generation Greyhound enthusiast
who is involved with the training
and preparation of racing greyhounds every day.
Our training operation caters for four different trainers,
including my partner, my grandfather,
my little brother, and my little sister.
We all work in together to keep the operation afloat.
My week looks like getting up early, helping
with the dogs morning routine, um,
and then getting ready for my nine to five job.
And then all the spare time I have, I'm with the dogs.
My days off, I like to refer to them as what day off.
Because we do not have days off.
Our dogs still need to be walked, exercised, fed, emptied,
cleaned, bathed, groomed,
and given unlimited attention no matter what the day is.
When I am asked what I do outside of my nine to five job,
I met with the hard decision
of whether I say I'm involved in greyhound racing.
I never know how people will react when I tell them this.
I believe there is so much misinformation
about greyhound racing.
I have witnessed and learned a lot from the in,
from this industry.
And a life without greyhounds is a life
I do not want to be a part of.
I have been called a sinner by the very man who is supposed
to live and breathe racing.
This is very upsetting for me
as I can never suggest a Greyhound trainer
or owner is a sinner.
Someone implying I am an animal abuser.
A person who purposely harms animals is disheartening
and deeply disturbing.
I'm concerned that the current welfare standards
that are upheld will no longer exist.
Meaning what is stopping?
Organizations like the SPCA whom are not certain will be
involved with rehoming, our greyhounds from euthanizing,
any greyhound, they do not fit to be seen.
They do not see fit
to be re-homed under their poor welfare slash assessing
standards that do not align with our highly
successful re-homing programs.
Injury statistics
and greyhound deaths from racing incidents is the reason
for the band being enforced.
However, they have been substantially lowered to 2.52% risk
of injury or possible death.
Most greyhound trainers would be happily, would happily,
um, like the complete integration
of the straight track racing, of which greyhounds is 66.6%
less likely to receive an injury.
And the injury is less likely to be serious,
of which does not exceed the 42 day stand down.
Redesigning new tracks
and implementing straight track racing would be extremely
beneficial to the survival of greyhound racing.
I believe moving all sprint races
to straight tracks would allow for better injury statistics.
Um, this would allow dogs to run more freely without
as much contact between runners,
therefore fewer chance of injury.
Closing down circle tracks for being the best interest
of dogs as there is a higher risk of serious injury.
In saying this, more data around the year, the time
of year greyhound's injury statistics are heightened over
the last five years might be beneficial
and seasonal racing for certain tracks and surfaces.
Looking at the industry from a bigger picture,
capping breeding would be beneficial to, beneficial
to greyhounds and trainers enforcing the utmost care
of smaller teams of dogs.
I still believe the welfare standards
of greyhounds are far better than that of a pet dog.
If greyhounds are to be banned, I lose my passion and love
and my partner loses everything he has invested in.
We're both very young and
to lose this industry is devastating on us.
We will end up having to leave our home country
and both our families to go to Australia
to continue to do what we love.
It is very hard to say we will be successful over there
as the cost of goal to set up is substantial.
But this is what we'll have to do to continue to do
what we love and are passionate about.
I can believe you are passionate about your job
and I believe that you can be portrayed in a bad light every
single day with decisions you make.
However, just
because some people portray you in a bad light,
it does not make what you are doing any less important
because you're passionate.
So yes, the build toand,
greyhound racing in New Zealand will dramatically affect me
and my family's life.
I'm an honest, hardworking kiwi
and without the dogs, I'll have
to face many challenges in the next few years
worrying about everything from the existence
of the greyhound breed to the welfare,
to the rehoming abilities, to the uncertainty
of my future in New Zealand
and the upheaval of my everyday life now.
Um, that's all I've written down, so yeah.
Thank you very much. Now we have a question here
from Rachel Boak.
Um, thank you Chair. Um, thank you Natas, uh,
for a really thoughtful submission.
And I do want to acknowledge, um,
that this is a really tough time for you and your family.
I'm interested in your comments around straight tracks
because I agree with you
that the evidence shows it reduces injury.
Yeah. Guess My question is,
do you think the industry's done enough
to transition to straight tracks?
Because it was identified a few years ago that
that was something that was recommended for industry
and we've got the one at Wong Nui, but we haven't Yeah.
Made enough of that transition.
Do you think perhaps in hindsight the industry could have
done more earlier to, to transition into straight tracks?
I do believe they could have done more
to transition into straight tracks.
Um, but it's, it's kind of hard
because the only statistics we had was from Australian
racing straight tracks,
which it's a different climate over there.
So you can't say that you're gonna put a straight track in
here and it's gonna, um, dramatically
improve injury statistics straight away.
Uh, I know that they were planning on putting a straight
track down in Christ, um, Christ
before the bill was obviously passed through
and the ban was yeah.
Put to government. But yeah.
Can I do a quick step please?
Yes. Good. Are you, are you saying that
Australia are inherently different and
therefore have different injury
outcomes compared to New Zealand?
And that what you, in your answer,
you're saying straight track wouldn't
necessarily resolve that?
Um, what I mean is we couldn't like
rely on that information.
So I think by bringing one straight track in
and the evidence now shows that
that straight track is far better
and the injury rate is far less.
So yeah, I don't really know the data
and the statistics around the straight track racing in
Australia, but I know that
the climate is different over there to here
and yeah, so that's where my head is on that.
Thank you. Oh,
Uh, Sue's red Mate. Sorry,
I'm just trying to understand stand it. Yeah.
And thank you very much for your submission.
That's excellent. Um, how,
how does the climate affect the dog's racing?
Like how, as opposed to the track. Yeah.
Is it, is it the about
Yep. So the heat affects
the track.
Um, there is lots of different things
that go into the preparation of a racing track.
So say we have a lot of rain like we've had recently,
the track becomes a lot heavier, which means they have
to prepare for that and they have to be aware
that they're gonna have a softer track, which
normally can be like, they can cause um,
I suppose more muscle injuries.
Um, or just, yeah, like little n*****s,
but every track is different
and like the heat has a different impact on a track
and the surface as well.
Thank you. There any further questions? Right.
Thank you very much for your submission, Tasia.
It was a very, very good submission and very thoughtful.
Um, thanks for your time.
Thank you so much. Right.
Um, we'll move on to our next submitter, Michael, do
that was here in per
Good morning, Mr. Chair
and committee.
Good. Good morning. Uh, Michael, welcome.
Welcome to the Primary Reduction Select committee.
Um, as you would've heard earlier, um,
you've got 10 minutes.
How you use that time's up
to you if I actually would like questions.
Um, I also should, um,
point out you could take your submissions as being read.
Yes. Committee is very vigilant
and would've read the submissions,
so they would've get the thrust of, of, of what your,
uh, submission is about.
Thank, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Pardon me.
Um, um, Michael drawing, I oppose the, the bills passing.
Um, I'd, I'd like to start with just,
just one quote from the start of my submission.
12 months ago, a very new team at GRNZ had said about
writing the annual report
and we're immediately confronted
by the euthanasia statistics.
Instantly knew we knew what our primary focus would be.
And with that in mind that we,
you can rule the line 2019 different team is, is in place.
We set about taking actions.
Um, less than a year later,
the Robertson review was announced.
We were delighted because we'd achieved so much,
but here is an independent public body that's gonna get all
of our good news out to, um, new New Zealand.
Um, and so we provided a submission to the Robertson Review.
Now I've got a quote from the Robertson Review.
Um, I've just got, I've got a picture of the graph.
The details of the graph don't matter,
but this is the er reproduction of the graph we
provided to the Robertson Review showing
how we had eliminated the euthanasia of, uh,
unnecessary euthanasia,
euthanasia dogs simply 'cause they were too slow.
This is the graph we provided.
You can imagine a surprise when Saru described this
as 462 in the last four years,
462 in the last four years.
Arithmetically fine, but I'm not sure that's a conclusion.
Now, if we asked Saru to do it today,
would he say 462 in the last eight years?
Or what do he say? None in the last four years?
So, um, later in his report, he accuses us
of obs sophistication, yet he calls this
462 in four years.
Um, the, the next item,
which was hot off the press when the Robertson review in the
appendix of my, um, submission, the Greyhound Audit
by breeding season, um, when I joined JNZ.
And I was thinking, I, I went looking for this document.
'cause surely if you are an animal welfare organization,
the number of you breed in the season is fixed.
And where are they now?
Um, this, this document didn't exist.
So we said about creating it
and then going back through those
dogs had been to the races.
We knew where they were, but any pups
or dogs hadn't raced for a while.
We actually phoned around the place, uh,
to make sure they were all there.
And we submitted the first one of these
to the Robertson review,
the Greyhound Population Audit report.
Um, he pretty much ignored it.
And then the data questions
that were raised elsewhere in his review,
which the audit report answered, um,
he just left them unanswered,
which again, seemed, seemed unfair.
Um, we did wonder would he have paid more attention
to it if we'd been able to say
this audit report has been verified by the RI
use annual kennel audits
as recommended in the Hanson report.
We couldn't say that because they hadn't done, uh,
a kennel audit for three years.
So that robbed us
of independent verification of what we are doing.
Um, and he also, he was inheriting the RIU as chair
of the RIB, so they were his staff.
He leaves out of his report
that they hadn't done a kennel audit for three years.
And you can imagine how undermined we were
by not having the independent body there, our eyes
and ears on the ground, and they're asleep.
So it, it was, it was, you could imagine
how annoying was, was to read that.
Um, further in the, in the Robson view, it wasn't his fault.
'cause he had an interview with a postgrad student
from Auckland University.
Um, and she'd done a, a paper on Rehoming, unfortunately,
had been completely subverted
by the Greyhound Protection League.
And, uh, statements in the thesis of Jerry's unit killing
thousands of dogs, thousands of dogs per year.
Hard to do that when you're only breeding 800, uh,
wasted just higher in greyhound racing than horse racing.
You'll see in my 75% of pups make it to the races,
only 50% of horses do.
Um, JRNZ would not pay for treatment of injuries.
Uh, we, we started the rehab
to every homing scheme prior to the Robertson Review.
It didn't get a big mention. Um,
greyhound breeders would only want one
or two pups from a litter of 10.
Uh, 75% of the pups make it to the racist.
The, the comment ambulance of the foot
of the cliff appears in the Robertson
review coming from this review.
So it's, um, it's pretty damning that, um, a
a advocate, an advocate group would lie to a,
a young student on doing her most important work.
Uh, just to get some propaganda out there,
when we contacted Professor Frank Bloomfield, deputy, um,
vice Chancellor of the Auckland University saying,
how did you allow this,
but they'd been identified as the Ground Protection League.
How did you allow this in research?
And he said, oh, that information all appeared in quotes,
shouldn't be regarded as facts yet.
Clearly the information, the quotes was used
to draw conclusions.
So one thing about Saru, he wasn't going anywhere.
He was the chairman of the RIB.
We'd have a chance to have a chat to him
and say, you know, what's, what's going on?
He has a medical event and no longer works for the RIB.
He's, he's, he's gone. He'd employed his
new staff for the RIB.
So we approached the CEO
and say, look, we need to tell the minister, we need
to put the minister right in terms of what's going on.
And, uh, he said, no, that's cherry. Okay.
So this is the first day that Parliament has learned
of the 462 in the last four years
that the animal population order report exists.
And that the RIU had not done a camel audit for three years.
Any questions?
Right. Um, thank you very much.
I I do have a question around currently how many of, um,
how many greyhounds do get rehomed on an annual
basis? I see in
Your, uh, last, last year we
rehomed just on 700, right?
That was in, in, in the annual report.
And, um, has that gone up, down, or, oh,
That, that's, that, that, that, that, that, that,
that has, that has gone up, um, significantly.
We, we commenced the, actually
don't need to say to you about the economy.
Uh, things were tough. Rehoming was getting more difficult.
We commenced the, um, USA rehoming program.
So we've, we've flown a hundred odd dogs for America
to rehoming, uh, to, to,
to assist with that, with that rehoming.
Um, and the rehoming number is the critical
number in greyhound racing.
You want to balance the num you, the, the size
of the industry should be.
How many dogs can you rehome a year
and balance that off with how many you breed.
Um, that's, that is
what we've been looking, looking to achieve.
Obviously, COVID o's come in like a steamroll
or in the middle of horses and didn't,
it doesn't really help, um, the progress going forward.
But if I could deliver to you for three years in a row,
the number of dogs I'm rehoming is
the number of dogs I'm breeding.
I've got that equilibrium. Everything's transparent.
The RIV are doing the thing.
Well, we supply Gallagher Animal Management software,
they scan the dogs and go straight to the cloud.
So it's transparent everywhere.
So yeah, things are, I thought things were on the up.
Uh, Rachel, Um, thanks for the submission.
I'm just having a look at the graph
of supplied us this morning.
Um, so it says unnecessary euthanasia,
but what about total euthanasia?
Uh, The, the, the, the, the euthanasia of dogs simply
because they were slow, um, has, has had various names.
Its current name is, is unnecessary euthanasia.
So the other, uh, euthanasia due to illness, euthanasia due
to injury or euthanasia due to, um, dangerous dogs.
And this last season, last season, um, the total
deaths in euthanasia in the ground.
And she was
a hundred thirty nine, a hundred thirty nine
for. And how did that compare
To previous years? Uh,
that's, uh, we had 142 the year before.
143, the year before that.
Um, be because obviously, you know, our euthanasia policy,
you've put it into law, it's, it's very, very locked tight.
You can't willy-nilly put it down.
If, if, if the vet says this is serious life threatening,
the dogs in pain, the vet's got the right option
by euthanasia, they do it.
Um, if it's something in between, they must refer it to,
to our vet panel who make the decision as to
what, what should go on.
So it's, um, it's a serious thing. But, um, yeah.
So you, you passed our euthanasia policy into law,
so you, it can't be too bad,
Tony. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
your submission.
Um, in your written submission, you talk about the,
the job losses from outside of the industry,
if this bill was to pass, so in terms
of the transitional arrangements, can you just touch on
that a a little bit?
Because within the industry, yes.
But you've identified
that there are potential job losses outside industry.
I, I think that was in my submission.
I, I i i, I, I just wanna opt to bring the, the, the pathway
to here was, was, wasn't, wasn't my submission.
That's okay.
So, um, if the planned, um, shut down
of the industry happens, what, how do you envisage
the dispersal of, firstly the, the, the animals
and secondly, the assets of the Greyhound racing New Zealand
to, to, um, proceed.
Um, possibly not best placed
to answer tho those questions,
but in, in terms of the rehoming of the animals, uh,
the greyhound industry was actually the destruction bill
passed in December, 2024.
The greyhound industry was thrilled about that
because if we do close, that keeps the SPCA off our dogs.
It's been very disappointing that since
that bill was passed, the SPCA have
done nothing to tell you.
Have they killed 10 dogs? Have they killed 20 greyhounds?
Who would know? They have not reported euthanasia in their
annual report since 2014.
Um, and if they did bring home a greyhound,
wouldn't they just kill another one in the background?
Um, I'd love you to ask these PCA,
which organization's more transparent, GR NZ or SPCA?
Certainly if you read our annual report,
the word euthanasia appears.
The word euthanasia has only appeared in an annual report
for the SPCA once in the last 10 years.
Alright, um, we've come to time.
So thank you very much for your submission, Michael.
Thank you. Thank you. Right.
Moving on. We now have
submission from Katie
Wiley. Morning, Katie.
Good morning. Welcome To the
Prime Reduction Select Committee.
Um, 10 minutes is allocated for your submission,
how you use bonds up to you,
but the, uh, committee would've read your submission.
So, um, time is in your hands now.
Uh, good morning. I'm Katie Wiley.
I strongly oppose the bill.
I'm 29 years old from Canterbury.
I've been in the industry for 10 years.
I am a trainer and everything that goes along with that.
And also the emerging director on the
Greyhound Racing New Zealand board.
Um, I have two beautiful greyhounds that live on my couch.
Um, both coming from my kings where I work.
Uh, so a normal week for me is I work six days a week
because I'm forced to have a day off.
Although on that day off, I'm still living,
breathing, greyhounds.
I'm looking at where we're gonna place our dogs to race.
Um, yeah,
uh, I, so a normal week for me would be, um,
working at the kennels as often as possible.
But quite often I'm traveling the dogs around the country
to the race meetings that we've placed them at.
You know, it takes a lot of time to plan them,
uh, go to the races.
I do some visits and just whatever needs to be done.
I'm very nervous for the future of our greyhounds.
Um, especially if the transitional agency takes over
because, you know,
we are doing everything right at the moment.
We're doing an amazing job.
We, um, rehomed a new number of greyhounds last year,
so why should it be taken away from us?
GRC needs to stay in place so
that we can continue doing a fantastic job that we are doing
because we know these dogs inside and out.
My concern is that if somebody else gets a hold
of our beautiful dogs, they won't understand them.
And there will be some unnecessary euthanasias,
because some greyhounds do take time to unwind from racing.
The bill has made my life extremely difficult.
I've had to put a lot of things on hold.
Um, I wanted to buy a house,
but, oh, you know, without a secure future,
I will highly unlikely get a mortgage.
So, potentially starting a family
and my future goals, were all based around, you know, racing
and what I could do in this industry.
I've got a teaching degree.
I chose to do some teaching for a bit,
but my heart just wasn't in it.
Once I met the greyhounds, I was, you know,
I was working in the weekends with the dogs
after school, going to the dogs,
and I just, yeah, I did enjoy teaching,
but not like I enjoyed the dogs.
The dogs don't have parents that,
you know, the dog's parents are a lot easier to deal with.
Um, so, so now I face the issues
of do I leave my family, which I love.
I'm a family girl to move over to Australia to do
what I love or do I stay here, perhaps
reuse my degree, but I won't be fully happy.
I'll be constantly thinking about the what ifs,
what happens if I go to Aussie and live my dream?
You know, I don't wanna leave my whole home country.
I'm Kiwi through and through.
Um, I couldn't work from
more compassionate understanding and caring people.
I've never had bosses like it. Um, like G and Dave.
Um, when the band took over,
Jean did the most selfless thing and, um, gave up her name
and the training partnership to let me train alongside Dave
so that I could win some races.
She, she knew that that was one of my life goals
to train a winner.
So I've been very, very lucky
with the people that I work for.
And I've never experienced such
amazing understanding bosses.
You know, you're part of them, you're part
of the team from day one,
and it, all of our staff are like that
and they all feel included.
Um, my last point I'd like to make is the equine codes.
If the bill is to proceed, I believe that they need
to start being held to the same standards that we are.
They need to start reporting their euthanasias
and be accountable.
Thank you very much. Your, um, submission.
Katie, look, do we have any questions, Kyle?
Um, thanks very much, chair. Thanks Katie for sharing.
Um, uh, your journey and the challenges that brings for you
and, uh, you may have raised on the chats in Nui, um,
where I hail from over the years.
Can you just share for us, uh, the difference
between the standards that dog health are held
to here in New Zealand, particularly around euthanasia, um,
and what they are to your knowledge in Australia
where you would consider going?
Um, witness bill is part, I don't
Believe that there is, um, the same, um, rehab to rehome,
um, policy in place.
Um, so obviously we take the dogs
and, um, rehab them and then rehome them.
Um, I believe in each state they have a higher
euthanasia rate than we have in this country.
And quick supplementary chair, do you know how many
of your colleagues are looking at Australia,
um, as an option?
Um, should this, uh, build past?
I think there's a, a lot of us younger ones
that are interested, it's a bit harder for, um, um,
older people that have a lot more family.
You know, their grandkids are here and,
but it's, it is quite big and, you know,
'cause we all wanna be happy.
Steve. Yeah. Thank you for your submission
and uh, we are left in no doubt about
how much an impact it's having in your life
and your life plans legislation.
Um, what at this time, given the intent
of the government to bring the industry to an end,
do you think could be done to minimize
that impact if it is on that trajectory?
I think, um, they need to look at
how they can help with our mental health.
Mm-hmm. Um, how, if the band does go ahead, um,
how they help transition people into
other fields and just yeah.
Look after the people and the dogs
because we are all good people. Yep.
Thank you. Any further questions?
No, thank you very much for your time, Katie.
I really appreciate it. It was a well thought through
and thoughtful, um, submission.
Thank you. Well Said.
Thank you.
Alright, we're moving on to, uh, Jean Fay.
Hi. Morning Jean. Um, I think you've heard enough Yeah.
From me to know what's going on, so, uh,
yeah. Thank you. Far away.
Thank you. Good morning everyone.
Um, I brought my granddaughter along.
It's a good learning curve for her to meet them parliament
and also, so she's got a weed little
statement she'd like to make.
Maybe at the end if she feels brave enough.
I hope that's okay. This is Hallie, uh, Hallie.
Um, she did make a submission.
So, um, I've been in the industry for 30 years
and I've been right through from breeder trainer, um,
right through to governance.
I've been on the GA board, which is Greyhound, Australasia,
and I'm currently on the, um, Christchurch board.
I'm the president. I'm also on the board
of Greyhound's Pits.
So I've obviously been involved in the Rehoming as well.
And I'm also on the on track, which is the mental health
for racing industry board.
So I've got a good knowledge across all sectors
of the, um, industry.
Um, obviously I oppose the bill, um, strongly oppose it.
Um, I feel as if the ban ignores
and does not acknowledge
how much we have put into the industry monetary wise
and effort wise over the last eight years to, with, um,
creating our welfare, our own welfare code
and the work we've done on the tracks.
And we continue even after the ban in December.
As I said in my submission, we still, still,
we opened the Nui track.
We were also brought up, you know, tried
to bring in some other initiatives to help, um,
with the welfare of our greyhounds.
And I, I get asked a lot by people
that are not racing people and not getting people.
Why is it just the greyhounds that have been,
um, considered to be banned?
Why isn't it not all three codes?
And that's people outside the industry.
So I just thought, I wanted to make sure
that people were aware of that.
Um, the way the bill cur, um, um, if we have
to go ho forward with the bill, um, I think we need to,
there needs to be consideration for a bit
of a longer length in time, um,
because we're gonna be left with all these dogs
and we, if somebody's gonna have to fund looking
after those greyhounds,
if we wanna con if we're
concerned about the welfare of them.
But as it's currently written, the bill does not look
after, does not, does not written to look
after the welfare of them.
In the explanatory notes, it states to bring the closure.
This bill establishes roles, responsibilities,
and processes for the closing of the industry.
These functions will ensure that animal welfare
and the wellbeing of the people are
prioritized throughout the closure.
Now there's, in the bill, there's only one time
that the welfare of the animal was considered.
That's under rehoming of specified greyhounds.
It says to facilitate the rehoming of specified greyhounds
and oversee their welfare.
That's the only time it is mentioned in the bill.
I just think that's pretty poor when that's
what you're closing us down for.
Regarding the, um, participants three times,
I'm pretty sure the statement is there.
It's in the objectives, it's under the functions
and duties of the agency.
It says to provide advice
and support to participants in the greyhound industry
who are transitioning
between racing codes or leaving the industry.
That does not tell me that you're looking
after the welfare of the,
or the mental health of the participants.
The bill does not give that in there.
So that is, you know, I just wanted to point that out.
Um, but in the bills, there's no,
um, indication of how
the agency's gonna oversee the welfare of the Greyhounds.
Um, at the moment, the RIV, which is independent of us,
which is the Racing Integrity Board, are tasked
with checking on the welfare of our greyhounds
by visiting our kennels.
Also by the, they, they employ the vets at the track.
So they, they over oversee all the
welfare of their greyhounds.
And when we've had issues,
which hasn't been in the last couple of years,
greyhounds have been removed from properties usually
within 24 hours.
I don't believe rescue agencies such
as the SPCA have been able to do that as quickly
as we've been able to do in our industry.
And I, I strongly recommend
that you consider using our current systems.
The RIB um, trouble is, that's funded by the hu
that when if we move out, whether the thoroughbreds
and the, um, the, the equine codes
or the horse racing will allow them
to still be involved in it.
But they're the ones with the knowledge,
they've got the vets with the experience,
they know the participants, the participants respect them.
'cause at the moment we don't respect any of the, um,
rehoming, um, the rescue agencies.
I'm, I'm a bit concerned about the welfare of the greyhounds
after the 1st of August 'cause there's nothing in there
to say how they're gonna be looked after.
I know that the, um,
current Mac committee are asking us if we will look
after our greyhounds, but to look
after our greyhounds participants need some sort of a
reimbursement covering of the costs, et cetera.
Um, a pa a daily payment to look
after the dogs like you would if you had in normal kennel.
For us, we are gonna have us personally,
we're probably gonna have 40 to 60 dogs left at our faculty.
50 dogs left based on our numbers. We have at the moment.
We, we haven't bred since the ban announcement in
December, 2024.
That's, sorry, that's yourselves. Um, that's us personally.
Absolutely. Yeah. So personally, so we've got some other
dogs owned by other trainers, uh, other owners,
but they, hopefully we'll go back to them.
So we may have another 10 dogs.
We might have to look after that.
Owners don't take responsibility for their dogs.
Our, our bill, the, our food bill
for the week would be somewhere in the vicinity of 14
to $1,500 a week.
Then we'd have to get a job to pay for that.
So somehow these dogs have to be looked after.
Um, and also you've got, you've got a clean, we will have
to exercise, we'll have to prepare them for rehoming.
So there's jobs that are gonna have to be done in that time.
So I think the bill needs
to consider how, how that's funded.
The, we, um, so I've been over the welfare of the dogs.
I'm concerned now about the welfare of the participants.
Obviously having been on the board of, um, on track, um,
I'm concerned about the, how that is deteriorating daily.
It's with the, with, um, what we hear in social media
by the, um, people that do not agree
with us continuing to race.
But in the, in, at the moment, on track is only funded
to the 31st of July by the racing industry.
So after that point, there has to be some funding for,
and even fund extra funding now.
'cause we need support now.
People are getting emotional, there's heightened, um,
people, yeah, it's, it's just even like this week,
people are feeling on edge.
So I just think the mental health
and wellbeing of the participants is vital
to the welfare of the greyhounds.
'cause if people get angry, whatever,
that's when they do something that they don't mean to do
because their mental health is compromised
and that support needs to continue for a couple of years.
I think it's gonna take a wee while for us
to transition the dogs into re homes.
So it's not just a one off thing.
Um, the other thing I'm concerned about is a lot
of the young ones have spent money
and even we've spent money trying to get our dogs up
to the requirements of the, um, welfare code.
But there's no reflection on if people have borrowed money.
We, we haven't personally,
but I'm sure some of those young ones have had to borrow
to get into the industry and be up to the correct standards.
So now we've got assets of minimal or no value.
And that's, that's disappointing.
And it's not the participant's fault.
We're up to eight minutes. Okay.
Um, my last thing, sorry.
Um, oh, I've got, I had some other things,
but by the, my concern is that by the TOB continuing
to take vision and betting on overseas greyhound racing,
'cause that's what has not been stopped.
The the government is supporting Greyhound racing
outside New Zealand because to be able to do that,
they're gonna have to pay those overseas
greyhound organizations.
And I think that's the last thing I want to allow you guys
to be aware of,
Steve.
Yeah, thank you. It's a very, um, strong submission again.
Um, do you have any clarity on how
the, the current assets of Greyhounds New Zealand will be
used in what you described as necessary?
The support of the people in the industry
and the support of the animals in the safe, what you see
as a two year transition? Well,
At Least two years. Yeah.
But is it clear to you how
that will happen at this stage?
No. There's been no indication we've had, we don't know
how those assets will be spent
or what will be done with them.
I mean, everyone feels it's gonna go the other two codes,
but I personally believe it's gonna be ha have
to be held out back for the participants in the industry.
We'd love to hear from you if you
wanna say anything as well.
No. Okay.
Yeah. Quick question and thanks Chair.
Um, thanks for the really comprehensive submission.
I'm just, I'm, I do really take the point around
what happens in terms of welfare for dogs
and for people from, um, you know, the date,
um, in the middle of the year.
I'm interested, I guess in, in terms of if you know,
you've got 40 to 60 dogs, have you done any, um,
analysis of how long you think you're gonna need to keep
that number of dogs in your care?
I'm just thinking about what compensation could look like,
for example, because I think it's a fair point.
You know, if you've got that number of dogs,
you can't get an income from them,
but you're gonna have them in your care potentially
for years if it takes a long time to rehome them.
Have you done any analysis on, you know, on, on what
that might look like for you?
Um, over a lot until, until all this process has stopped,
then I certainly will look at it.
Yeah. I do know that I've already put money aside
for paying my wages, um, for a few months
after to give them the benefit
that they can take time to find jobs.
'cause how many employees do I need?
I probably won't need as many. So I'm starting
to put money away myself personally.
But I think a lot of people live from week to week.
They won't be able to do that. Yeah.
I'm just very lucky that we're successful
and I, we do have the money.
Yeah. But I'm thinking of everyone else.
Yeah, no, I appreciate that.
It's just trying to get an understanding of what
that full cost could look like.
We, I know it's hard. I know. Yeah. Yeah.
But I, I do have all that information.
I have been starting to work on that myself.
'cause it might be useful to send it through to us
as a supplementary Yeah.
In a couple of ways or
something. 'cause we'll still be working.
We'd really appreciate that. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much for, um, your time this morning.
Um, we'll move on now to, uh, Brendan Burke, who's going
to be submitting via Zoom.
Good morning. Good morning. Good morning Brendan.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
You have, um, uh, 10 minutes allocated
for your submission this morning.
Um, if you want questions, uh, we, uh,
suggest you leave time for those to be asked
and the committee would have, um, read your submission.
So, um, there's no need to read
through the submission word for word.
Um, the time is yours.
Thank you very much and thank you for the opportunity.
My name is Brendan Burke. I'm from in the Cargill.
I opposed the bill.
I have a 40 year involvement in the Greyhound industry
as an owner trainer handler.
I've served on the Cub administration
and I have fulfilled most race day activities.
Some of my best friends
and closest friends are those who I've met
through the Greyhound industry.
Now you have read my written submission.
I would just like to touch on two points, um,
that I did in the written submission.
Um, the two areas that gave me the greatest concern was,
one, I thought the decision was prejudicial in the fact
that if it was based on animal welfare, it's only, um,
the greyhounds that have been singled out, um, for
welfare issues.
And the other was if it was based on the wagering, um,
aspect, then neither the thoroughbred
or the standard bred codes were subjected to the, um,
same scrutiny that the greyhounds were.
The other point that, um, gave me concern was I went
to visit my local MP when the, um,
and the bill was put through, um,
for the closure of Greyhound racing.
Um, the MP wouldn't meet with me, but her office staff did.
And she gave, they gave me a, um, document
that had been circulated to all mps
and why the decision was made in principle
to end Greyhound racing.
Now, um, a lot of those questions, um,
or the decisions that have been made, a lot
of those questions have yet to be answered.
We're now in month 14 of the 20
and there's still a lot of uncertainty about what was going
to happen and what is happening.
So, um, I think the decision was made
to end Greyhound racing
and it's been left up to the ministerial advisory committee
to come up with a logical reason as
to why that should happen.
So, um, they're working backwards
and effective, is what I'm saying.
Greyhound racing saved my life.
And, um, a few years ago,
40 years ago, um, I had a challenge
to give up cigarette smoking.
And at the same time, um, some work colleagues got a she
and a Greyhound and the discretionary income that I had from
not smoking, I invested in my first Greyhound.
And, um, it wasn't successful.
Um, the second one was a lot more successful,
but, um, I've become addicted to the animal
and I was able to be hands on where my bill doesn't allow me
to do the same with a race horse.
And, um, the fix
that I was missing from nicotine, from nicotine, I was able
to get, um, through success
and involvement in the Greyhound industry.
So I credit it with saving my life.
That's, um, about all
I happy to answer some questions if you have them
Questions, Steve?
Yeah, thank you Brendan.
And, um, I guess the intent of the
parliament is clear and, um,
and then the, the question that is useful for us
to understand is how do we, um,
minimize or, or smooth away for the transition
so that, uh, the likes of yourself are able to still have
some relationship with the dogs
and, um, that you are supported and the, the workers
and the people involved are
supported as well as the animals.
I wonder if you have reflections on that, um, how
that could be being done more clearly
or better from your perspective.
Well, the simple answer to that is, um, is
to not let the bull go through.
And, um, we won't have to worry about any of those things.
I, um, still firmly believe
that the bill will not be passed.
And, um, I haven't allowed myself to think, um,
what would happen past that point.
Just a question, uh, Brendan around the, um,
ministerial advisory group.
Have, have you had any, um, interaction with
that group at all?
No. And, um, from what you read
and hear, there's been, um, very little
or no consultation between, um, the government
or the ministerial advisory committee
to the industry participants.
The decision to, um,
end Greyhound racing was made without consultation.
Todd, Hi, uh, Brendan, Todd Stevenson here, uh,
fellow Lander as well.
So I grew up in Incar.
So nice to have you here and thanks for making submission.
Uh, the last submitter just talked a bit about the costs
of actually owning a Greyhound,
the food bill a week, et cetera.
Could you just give us a rough outline of Yeah.
What it, what kind of it costs you to look, you know,
be a Greyhound owner and the cost
You've lost, you've lost your art,
the ability to roll your,
So sorry about that. I
Haven't, in my submission I put that I have no active
or financial involvement currently in the Greyhounds.
So, um, I'm not probably the best one to answer
that question on what the cost is involved.
Um, I am more on the sidelines now
and um, but I still have a very, very deep interest in the,
um, industry.
And as I said before, I got a lot
of friends in the industry, some of my closest friends, um,
I've met through Greyhound racing.
And it's the fear for their future that, um, disturbs me
that what the, um,
impact will be if the industry is closed down.
Thanks. Uh, thanks very much
for your submission, Brendan.
Um, I really appreciate it
and, um, uh, uh, good luck.
So, uh, we'll move on to our next submitter, Mr. Chair.
Point of order briefly, I wonder if we could request our
colleague from ACT
to do his performative re removal of his pin. 'cause he,
Oh, sorry. He loves
to do it here at this committee.
No problem. Mr. Abel.
Thank you. Uh, it comes with the suit you see,
so thank you Mr. Stevenson.
Right. We'll move on to Janine C**k via Zoom,
who is, uh, scheduled submitter.
Morning Janine, uh, welcome
to the Prime Production Select Committee.
Um, you've been allocated 10 minutes
for your submission this morning, um,
how use that time's up to you.
But if you want questions, we suggest
you leave some time at the end for that.
Um, time is in your hands
now, way you go.
Good morning. Um, I strongly oppose, uh,
the ban on Greyhound racing.
Um, I'm somebody who's been in the industry
pretty much all of my life.
I am now 55.
My parents got our Greyhound when I was around 10,
and it has been my passion since day one,
uh, the remaining animals to work with.
And alongside of that, you get an extended family
with the other participants that are the game.
Um, we moved to the country
to fulfill a dream of training these wonderful animals.
Um, that is something I've never ever regretted in my life.
I've had other jobs throughout to help fund it.
And, and I became a public trainer, which I trained
for other people as well.
Uh, about three years ago, we had to sell the first farm
and, um, pretty much give up the dream of training.
Uh, when that happened, we moved to town.
Um, I started to work at the Christ Australian Racing Club
because I could stay away.
Um, I, as you can tell, I've been emotional about it all.
Um, it's been a huge part
of me and how I've shaped my, um,
my dogs become my children.
Um, and they still are. One of them is here with me.
Um, I also was very
interactive with the, um, industry.
I like help them if they have any questions.
I still have lot of them come to me
for questions, answers.
And one of my biggest thrills is seeing these young people
who watched grow up and thrive in the industry
and now kicking goals and succeeding and living dream.
Um, when the bill got announced,
we only had seen months,
and that was gonna be the end of everything.
Um, I seen their dreams shatter alongside my own.
Um, as you can tell, we're a huge family.
Everybody supports one another.
Um, the fact
that it was announced without consultation weeks
before Christmas, um,
it was really hard to comprehend.
Um, the fact we were having 16 months,
it's even a life cycle of a racing dog.
I believe this was to happen.
We probably have been given around five year one
that would give enough time for people to
tradition their life, uh,
watch the dogs do what they love,
and then our rehoming,
our wonderful rehoming groups do their job
and get them back at homes.
Um, we have a lot with dogs.
We've rehomed our kennel in the past.
Um, I attended their birthdays right up until his 13th,
which was year or so ago until she passed.
And now those people have got another one of my dogs
because they liked the fact that we interact.
And so many of us do
because we want to know where our babies are.
Um, as I say, I work
for the Christchurch Grand Racing Club.
Um, it's a club we've been associated with the whole time.
My father was a big club man.
He, he worked in on committees.
He volunteered his time I my time from when I was probably
12 in the kennel there through to the office
and gave me a base, which I now am employed by.
Um, I'm actually just pleased
my parents have passed and they had to through the pain.
I've losing this as,
um,
I'm not much speaker.
Um, just the fact that
this country, it's rugby racing
and beer we grew up with, um, fear
for the other codes
because I don't want anybody to go through what we've,
through this past few months
and I really don't want to go
through what's gonna happen in six months if
this ban does go through.
Um, I wanna thank you for your time
and that's about all I've got.
Thanks Janine. We have a question here from Tanga U
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you Janine, for your submission.
Um, in your written submission, you talk about the impact
that it would have beyond the industry
and you've, um, used the four venues.
Um, there, I I have visited all the venues
that you, uh, have mentioned.
And I I live within about three kilometers, obviously,
of the Palmers North, um, raceway.
Um, to what extent do you think that, uh,
any compensation should be made available to those, uh,
directly outside of the industry?
'cause you've identified quite a few there,
but if this bill is successful, uh, then
where do you see the compensation, um, aspects aligning
with those points that you've made?
Uh, yeah, I, I did, um, put in my question, um,
it goes far Ed than just the grund and the participants
and everything said, uh, the venue
that we raised at Christie, uh, at raceway, they're probably
are gonna be half a million dollars down, um,
on just losing our rental
and the things that Christchurch do at,
at there, at that track.
Uh, then you've got Ascot Park Mantu in Cambridge.
Um, I'm not sure I, I presume the other racing coast
or I'm not sure, um, if they're gonna fund that,
but I presume it'll come outta of the racing network.
I'll just stuff on that. Thanks.
So is it your view then that,
because those venues primarily are tasked with, uh,
greyhound racing activities or, um,
or yeah, greyhound racing activities,
that they should be in line for some form of consideration
for compensation as opposed to some
of the other bullet points that you've talked
around fuel companies and those sorts of things?
Um, I'm not, I'm not sure.
Um, I think it's kind of out
of my league, um, to be honest.
Um, I just see the rock, the,
the total effect of loss of, of everything community
likes, Selwyn, district Council, like you are gonna,
you lose this, the many trainers
that live in the area down here
and they're gonna lose a lot of low revenue from
garages, workshops, companies, food,
and even the district rates
and dog registrations, you know, so
where does compensations?
I'm not sure. Um, yeah,
Thanks Janine.
Um, I was wondering about the rehoming and,
and, um, if current, um, uh,
proposal goes ahead, how do you see, uh, rehoming
of the, all the dogs in the industry taking place
and over what period of time would you expect, um,
the dogs to be rehomed?
Because obviously it's a significant number more than have
been rehomed in the past.
Um, how do you see that playing out?
Uh, it's a very difficult, um, time to
analyze a specific timeframe of what's gonna happen.
Uh, they do a fantastic job, um,
but there's only so many homes out there and,
and so it is gonna take a lot of time.
Um, yeah,
I'm just worried that they're not gonna be give our home
agencies the time that they need to do it.
We need to make sure they do
because they know greyhounds like we do.
They understand what they need
and honestly, we have to give them the time.
And as I said, if they've given us a,
a decent wind down period,
this would've been done over the time.
And this, this question wouldn't be asked
because we would've already honed a lot of,
and it would've naturally wound down.
Thank you, Janine. Um, the time is up.
I really appreciate and the committee really appreciates
your, um, submission
and, um, we, uh, very empathetic
to I guess, uh, your, your situation and,
and we can see that you, we your hard on your sleeve.
Thank you for your time this morning. Thank
You very much.
Now, um, we're moving on to our next submitter,
Chloe Watson who is on Zoom.
Pretty good.
Oh, hi ya. Good morning Chloe.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select committee.
Um, you've been allocated 10 minutes
for your submission this morning.
Um, the committee would've read your written submission.
Yep. Um, time is in your hand, so away you go.
Hi, um, I'm Chloe Watson.
I'm a 21-year-old, uh, greyhound handler or kennel staff.
Um, I work for my in-laws currently.
Um, we have about a kennel of 80 dogs
and most dogs quite a few retired or,
or with the intention of to breed.
Um, but obviously with the band that's put a hold on a lot
of our plans, um, as a operation.
Um, previously I've worked, um, in rehab
and Rehoming program, so that's the RTR program
for Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
Um, so basically that program is, um, ensures
that any greyhounds on the track that made
to a major injury, um, they're all sent to a facility.
Um, my aunt up north handles all the RTR dogs up there.
Um, so basically the all their care is funded.
Greyhound racing, New Zealand pays for all surgeries.
Um, and it just means that any greyhounds
that might do a major injury really get the,
the prime care they need.
Um, so to my knowledge,
Greyhound racing New Zealand is the only, um,
racing industry in New Zealand that has, um, a rehab
facility, um, to my knowledge,
thoroughbreds and Harness do not.
Um, I've also worked, um, currently I help foster
for May Hound, so I'm quite
involved in the re-homing sector as well.
Um, and I've been in the industry
since I was eight years old.
Um, previously my family trained thoroughbreds
and my grand hand has been involved
in harness racing as well.
So I've got a good well-rounded idea of all three codes,
um, to an extent.
Um, when it comes to re-homing, uh, you know,
Greyhound Racing New Zealand provide greyhounds that are up
to date and vaccinations.
They've got a full dental workup just done.
They're des sexing has been completed.
Um, and then they've obviously been up to date with flea
and worms and everything else they need.
So any dogs
that might have any other medical conditions such as corns,
panas, all of that is attended to prior to Rehoming.
So these dogs are getting rehomed in the best fit health
that they can possibly be.
Um, when it comes to how long it's gonna take
to rehome all these dogs pass the ban, it's an easy three
to four years looking at
how many dogs we've rehomed every year, um,
which is a big ask for people that, you know,
might not have the income now to support all these dogs, um,
to be asked to look after them to three to four years.
And we've had no communication on whether we're gonna get
any income or we're gonna have any support to,
to look after our dogs.
And a lot of trainers, well, 99% that I've talked to,
I haven't spoken to all trainers,
but every single one I've talked
to do not want these dogs going to SPCA
or any other rehoming organization.
We would like them to stay with Greyhound Racing New
Zealand's program, um,
because they're fit to look after these dogs.
They know what they need
and they understand how
to transition a well-rounded race dog to a pet.
Um, a lot of the time I hear people say things such as
that greyhounds are not well socialized
and that they are so hard to adjust to homes,
which is the complete opposite.
Um, I've got a few, I've had a foster and at the minute,
and I've had fosters over the years
and they're probably the easiest dogs I've had transition.
They're well-rounded routine dogs.
They transition well into a home, um, with the exception
of maybe a few dogs.
Um, but there is to kennel train the easy to toilet train.
They are the easiest dogs I've ever had.
Um, when it comes to adult dogs,
ground puppies are a little bit of an exception.
Um, but when we're looking at the ESC rules,
which is the exercise socialization
and enrichment program
that Greyhound racing New Zealand have, um,
every greyhound has to meet a standard of socialization,
enrichment and exercise per day, per year.
Um, so greyhounds are well socialized, they're well-rounded,
and they're really easy dogs to put into homes
with obviously the exception of a few.
Um, when it comes to statistics on deaths
and injuries, um, you look at the three codes.
Um, so deaths are down 87.25% on the industry
since 2021 for Greyhounds.
Um, when we look at the thoroughbred stats versus the
Greyhound stats in 20 23, 20 24 season,
thoroughbreds had 26,000 roughly starters
to 20 horse deaths.
Greyhounds had 36,000 starters, so
that's an extra 10,000 starters a year,
and they only had 13 deaths.
So, you know,
and in a percentage wise,
greyhounds have a lot lower euthanization
rate than horses do.
Um, only 20.2 0.52% risk
of injury death within a race.
So that means that there's 97.48% greyhounds
that have zero chance of industry while racing.
I've seen many greyhounds that have had no industry, uh,
injury on track, and then they go into a home
and due to whatever reason, um,
they could do a major injury, they could do a sillas.
I've seen dogs have an amputated leg off the track
with no correlation to, uh, racing, um, in a home.
I've seen dogs do metatarsals hawks, all sorts.
Um, so to say that greyhound racing is so dangerous
because they do all these major injuries well,
they're quite easily able
and susceptible to do them off track.
Um, and it's not to, you know, say
that obviously greyhound racing is amazing and safe,
and it is in retrospect,
but you look at also how, um,
Nastasia had said this morning about straight track racing.
Yes, straight track racing is a lot safer,
but we did not get the opportunity to see
how safe it could be or to continue using it
because we had an Ashburn track in plans, um,
and we weren't able to ex, um, execute those plans
because of the band.
So we were never given the opportunity to,
um, you know, continue.
So that's pretty much all I have.
Um, I wanna just finish with a, with a quick question.
If, um, this is our first time as an industry
to have a voice, I don't quite understand why
we haven't had one prior Greyhound racing in New Zealand
have suggested and,
and asked for meetings with Winston Peters
and other lp uh, mps in that previously.
Um, and we've either been turned down
or just completely ignored.
Do you, do you have any idea as to why we've had no chance
to either say our side
or have a voice prior to the select committee hearings?
Um, look, I, I guess, uh, that's a question
that you would've to put to, um, minister Peters.
It's a bit hard to get a hold
of him if we can't even get a response
to if he can meet us or not.
I, and I can't answer on his behalf. I'm
Sorry. No, that's fine.
Thank you so much.
Um, now we have a question from Yep. Rachel. Rachel, boy.
Yeah. Thanks, chair. Um, thanks very much, Janice. Yes.
And I just concur, we are a separate part of
how the government operates, so we are responsible.
Yeah, I just wanted to kind of point out that we've had
no connection to him. Yeah.
Um, one of the reasons why we've given you all 10 minutes
to ensure that through this process you do get
that voice. So just, um,
Yes, thank you. Just,
Just a question about straight
tracks and it's, it's, mm-hmm.
It's the same question I asked Nastasia this morning
because straight tracks were identified quite some time ago.
And, um, you know, one of the challenges I would put
to industry is that it was identified as a mitigation, um,
but we just did not see enough fast action on
introducing straight tracks.
Do you think that industry could have moved
faster to get those in place?
Could have, did you say, sorry?
Do you think industry could have moved faster
to get straight tracks in place? I
Think in regards to the behind the scenes, um,
I think they kind of moved as fast as they generally could.
It's a lot of funding to go
and build a, not only a new track, but a new straight track.
They had to obviously hire that land off the, um,
the Gallopers in Whanganui,
and then they had to obviously build the whole track.
I think in regards, they have done a very good job, um,
in regards to how long it took to build, how long it took
to plan, how long it took to find the funding.
Um, and then there were a little bit
of hiccups along the way, um, to put it in place.
Um, like I said, the Ashburn and one straight
after this Wang Straight was sorted.
They had plans to do the Ashburn track,
however it was about to be executed,
and then the band came in place.
So we had no way
of knowing whether straight track racing
would be the way to go.
Um, if we cannot, you know, add another track in.
Any, any further questions? No. Alright.
Thank you very much for your submission, Chloe.
It's perfect. It was really, really good
to get those insights.
Amazing. Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. Thank you, Chloe.
Alright, we'll move on now to, um, Janice Sadler.
She's on Zoom as well. On Zoom. Okay.
Good morning, j Janice.
Welcome to the, uh, primary production select committee.
You've been allocated 10 minutes, uh, use, that's up to you.
The committee would've read your, um, submission.
Uh, so if you want questions, leave time for those as well.
Um, so it's in your hands now.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Dennis Sadler.
I am South Island Coordinator
for May Hounds Charitable Trust.
Um, alongside that, I foster Greyhound as well
and have my own pets.
I have no financial involvement in Greyhound racing,
so I'm speaking purely from a and wealthiest perspective.
I'd also like to introduce you
to my current foster Greyhound here.
Um, this is Lily.
So sorry, I'm not sure if you can see Lily.
Yes, we can. Uh, this is Lily.
As you can see, she's a beautiful, calm dog.
I've had her in foster for about, uh,
just under three weeks.
Um, and
although she's a beautiful, calm, wonderful Greyhound,
she's also a prime example of why good re homey takes time.
I opposed Ben, but if it is to proceed, uh,
five day wind down, similar to what Tasmania has done, uh,
their approach would be a far more respectable, uh, sorry,
responsible and welfare focused approach.
It allows Greyhounds to retire and be rehomed safely
and gives people affected time to transition into, um,
alternative work or find alternative income if they're not
directly associated with the industry.
Greyhound, rehoming groups have largely been kept in the
dark, well, completely kept in the dark.
When the ban was announced, we were told there was a plan
that there's been no consultation has occurred,
and no guidance has been
provided on how a transition authority would operate.
This is the first opportunity we've had to have a voice.
While the Ministry Advisory Committee has met
with Rehoming groups, focus has been on gathering
information from us about our procedures and, and processes.
There's been no clarity from them on how it will operate,
be funded, the timeframe it will exist,
and what will happen to greyhounds
who have been rehomed and need support.
It raises serious concerns
that a new authority without experience in rehiring could
replace an established system that successfully rehomed
around 697 greyhounds.
Last year, hying agencies were asked
to submit submissions of interest about working
with the transition agency with no information.
The only clear message we received was in that same email,
which stated that Greyhound should be quick, uh, re-homed
as quickly as possible, which is deeply concerning
because welfare does not equate to, uh, sorry.
Speed does not equate to welfare.
Some greyhounds can be homed immediately.
Others can take time to adjust from athlete to family.
Pet, every dog is an individual.
Lily here, she's a great example
of, um, a dog that needs to be placed correctly.
She's a dog that, um, she needs her space around other dogs.
Um, so careful matching
and education's gonna be the key
to her going into a successful home.
Other dogs often, uh, need extra time or education
and, um, the rehoming groups understand these dogs
and understand their needs really well.
The Great Mates program supports the re homers by ensuring
that, um, before the re homers get any of the dogs, we,
uh, they've already been vetted desexed, um,
behavioral work, and all the notes come to us.
So all we have to focus on is, um,
placing them into the correct homes for them.
So in May Hounds Place,
usually they'll go into Foster first, so we get to see
what they're like in a home environment,
and then we carefully place them and follow up information
and, and care as well for the, um, adopters.
Uh, with three home networks, largely, sorry,
with three home networks largely, uh, voluntary run,
we will be under significant strain.
Most of us have full-time jobs, um,
and we've had no consultation yet.
We are the ones probably likely to be tasked
with rehoming these dogs in the short term.
Um, attention funding
and resources are likely to focus on greyhounds.
So, um, the attention's gonna be funneled into greyhounds.
Where is it gonna leave other rescue agencies?
So I can see an actual increase in other breed Euthanasias
down the line while the focus on is, is on Greyhounds.
Um, New Zealand already has a system that works.
So if welfare has been cited as the reason for the ban,
welfare needs to be at the forefront of, um,
any rehoming going forward.
Um, rush timelines, lack of consultation
and loss of established framework, risk creating issues,
and placing greyhounds in a far more vulnerable position
than where they started.
So rather than protecting them,
you're putting them in a more, um, vulnerable position.
I urge the select committer to
consider a five year wa five year, sorry,
five year wind down, similar to what Tasmania is doing, um,
alongside Greyhound racing,
new Zealand's great Mates program program, a system
that successfully re-homed
around 697 greyhounds last year alone.
Um, it has been developed
and, um, over time and its processes work
and safeguards are in place.
I it's a system I've been proud to be part
of. Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much, Janice.
We've got a couple of questions here. One from Steve Abel.
Yeah, thank you very much, uh, Janice. It's lovely.
See a dog too. And, um, um,
I wonder we can, we can make, um, recommendations
as a committee, uh, to the minister for his consideration.
And one obvious one that comes out of your submission is
that we should first
and foremost use existing rehoming networks
and support, um, appropriately the likes
of yourself and others who are experienced
and adept in understanding the best pathways
for Rehoming greyhounds.
Would that be something you'd advise us to do?
Obviously, my first choice would be not to ban,
I don't think, as well as a second, um, option.
If it is to be banned, then yes, a, um, five year,
year wind down, which is
what other countries are implementing
if they, if they're banning.
Yeah. And, um, you've got a framework that works,
why replace it with people who understand greyhounds?
Why replace it with bureaucrats, sorry to be, um,
but they don't understand greyhounds.
It's a strong point. Yep. Thank you.
Now we have a question from Brooklyn Den.
Uh, well thank you very much, uh, Janice,
uh, for your submission.
Um, I'm standing in for my ACT colleague, uh, Mark Cameron,
who couldn't be with us here today.
Um, so it's a real privilege, uh,
for me to hear your submission.
Um, I just wondered, with the years
of extensive experience you have, uh,
being a volunteer in this space, um,
I wondered if you could give us a little bit more insight
into how long it takes you
and the people that you work with for each individual dog
to go through that process
of the desex the vets placing into homes for adoption
or the transition into foster care.
What would you say on average is
that timeframe for each dog?
It's, it's individualized. It's very, very individualized.
So, um, often I'd say the average get a dog into a home
is probably about three months.
Um, but it's, it's all dependent.
So we could have a dog ready for a home,
but it's dependent on the right applicant coming in as well.
Mm-hmm. So, um, as Chloe alluded to, there's,
there's not everybody's suitable to adopt a greyhound.
They do have some specific needs, um,
and some specific considerations.
So, uh, they're not an outside dog, for example.
So, um, it just depends on the, uh,
dog being ready and the right applicant coming
and being able to, if,
if we haven't got the right applicant, then we wait.
Mm-hmm. And with the, um, as a, as a supplementary to
that, then with the, um, a number of dogs that are,
are currently in the process of being re-homed under the,
in, under the current settings anyway,
is there quite often just, uh, oversupply of dogs versus
how many people there are to adopt and foster,
or does it currently match?
I think the fact that we rehomed 697 greyhounds last year
shows that that, um, is, um,
aligns with how many dogs were coming in at the same time.
So I think yes, we do right, wait for the right applicant,
but I think we have got at the current number,
it is a sustainable
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Thank, Uh, thank you very much, Janice,
for your submission.
It was really good to get those insights from yourself, um,
and we really appreciate it.
Time move. Thanks. Thank you very much.
We're gonna move on to our next submitter now,
Murray Cutler
Marie,
That's Marie All
Minutes ago. Yeah.
Um, I've got bits of paper for you,
Us to bring coffee.
Do you need one? Yeah, I'll,
So welcome along to the committee.
Um, you've seen the
procedures, you, you know what's happening.
So, um, the time is in your hands.
Great, thank you. Um, I was very disappointed
that I couldn't bring a dog, so, um, you,
You can have dogs here. Yeah. You're allowed
Dogs. Oh, they told
us we weren't allowed to bring them in.
Not for, oh, not for the public. Oh, so you can have dogs.
We got, so I bought some pictures anyway, um,
Yeah, This is my current foster Connie.
I don't, this is not, this is when she was,
um, at a kennel.
Uh, this is not, um, a dirty kennel or anything.
This is a self dug sand pitch. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Yeah. Um,
I Was gonna stand up. Yeah.
And this is, um,
my racing dog at the same kennel.
Um, it was winter, so he gets a little jacket. Okay.
So, um,
I have my journey into Greyhound.
Started off with a, um,
adopting a retired Greyhound named Peggy in 2021.
Um, we also have a racing greyhound Balu, who I've had from
a puppy with the intention
of bringing him home when he retires.
So I don't know if you've got this picture,
but this is him at, um,
three months old, so they're quite big.
Um, I'd go
and see him every six months while he was training.
This was him when I saw him in Cambridge after six months.
Um, and this was him probably a couple of weeks ago.
Um, he just had a run around the paddock and he was done.
So he's like, are, are you coming to get me?
Um, this is Peggy. She comes to school with me.
I'm a primary school teacher. The kids love her.
Um, she came to
when they were training for athletics,
because they were talking about speed
and how fast she was versus how fast they were.
Um, so they had a race with her down the, um, track.
They were most disturbed that she won, but decided that
because she had four legs, it was okay.
Um, and this is, um, a reading program
where they'll read to her.
So she generally just goes straight to sleep
and they still show her the pictures.
Um, along with my primary school job,
I choose my, in my holidays, I choose to go down
and work in the kennels with Ballou where he's trained.
I do this so that I can learn more about how to care
for the special breed of dog
and to be a better greyhound owner.
I'm also part of the May Hounds Rehoming group, like Janice.
So I generally have a foster or two at home.
Being involved as an owner, a handler,
and a re homer, I'm privileged to see all aspects
of a racing greyhound's life from birth to death
and the stages in between.
So I don't just see them from rehoming or from training.
Initially I got involved in greyhound racing so
that I could have an informed opinion.
I don't bet on the dogs, I don't care who wins or loses,
but I do care about fairness
for those involved in the industry
and the welfare of the dogs.
And that's what brings me here today.
I believe the bill should not go
through in its current state
and under its current timeframe.
The implications of this bill are far reaching
and will impact more than just greyhound welfare.
So I believe, like the Robertson report on page 13 states
that if we are seriously contemplating
banning greyhound racing, then a full scale inquiry will
should be required to assess the consequences
of the actions which are wider than,
and this has not been done.
I have good friends who through no fault
of their own will lose everything they've
looked for and invested in.
They've willingly complied with any
and all rule changes imposed on them,
many requiring further financial investment.
If they want to continue to work in the area
that they have skills for and that they love.
They've no choice but
to leave their family's friends support network and country.
I believe the least the committee could do would be
to recommend a full inquiry as per the Robertson report.
Additionally, I think an inquiry is justified due
to the inquiry and historical information that is being used
by the media to promote the introduction of the bill.
I oppose Greyhound racing, the Greyhound racing Band
for many reasons, but most importantly
for the sake of the dogs.
And now I'm just getting tongue here a second.
The bill doesn't provide the same high level of care
and protection that the dogs have under
Greyhound Racing New Zealand rules.
Currently greyhounds are the most regulated
animals in Australasia.
This means there's a high baseline
of safety and accountability.
Greyhounds are easily found,
easily identified, and always looked out for.
They can only be euthanized under specific circumstances
and on a vet's recommendation and sign off.
If a, if the bill goes through
and greyhound racing finishes, their welfare
and protection is diminished to that of a pet dog.
Greyhounds may join the ranks of roaming and neglected dogs.
Greyhounds may be put down just like their pet dogs, often
through no fault of their own
grey house may be inadequately, inadequacy,
re-homed, and then surrendered.
Also leading to euthanasia.
Uh, we had a foster dog that, uh, decided
to go out the gate with a builder
and go for a little walk down the road.
It was picked up by the pound.
About 20 minutes later, there were three of us, the,
uh, fosterer, myself
and somebody else from my hounds
who were ringing all the pounds to find this dog.
When we got through to the pound, the poor man on the,
the other end of the phone said, I've never had
three people trying to find one dog
and make sure that it's fed well, isn't put
with other kinds of animals.
And, um, anyway, we got it back as soon as we could.
And it was, he only just decided to go for a walk
with the builder 'cause the builders left the gate up.
So I would like to recommend, I would like the committee
to recommend that Greyhound, not
that any Greyhound not currently rehomed will remain under
the gr greyhound Racing New Zealand welfare rules.
For better or worse, greyhounds are u are unique right down
to their blood type or their sought after blood type.
They've got a universal blood type, so they're often, um,
wanted as blood donors,
they have a high oxygen rate in their blood.
Mm-hmm. So yeah, that's universal.
Um, so different needs to your average pet dog.
And this bill removes the people who have the experience
and the skills needed when training
and rehoming greyhounds There, if there's no trainers,
the dogs coming through to rehoming
or to fostering for me, will be completely untrained.
A one-year-old Greyhound is not your typical
calm and relaxed greyhound.
Most people meet, you really have to see one to believe it.
Their bodies are nearly full size,
but their brains are still immature.
They have a constant need to run,
and they dunno when to stop.
Their natural instinct is to run, hunt chase,
and without training, they dunno how to walk on a lead,
respond to instruction, be handled, relaxed,
and socialized with people and other dogs.
There's no way, as a foster, I would have the time, skill,
or experience to train a greyhound if it arrived without the
high usual high level of training.
I currently have Connie, a 2-year-old foster
who is smart enough to unscrew a toothpaste lid
with her teeth off of the toothpaste,
and then paint the duvet cover with the toothpaste.
But thankfully, she has been trained
in response to the word no.
And is happy to be led away from the scene of the crime.
I cannot imagine fostering an untrained great greyhound
who hasn't had the lengthy education
and routine they are given by the offenders.
Additionally, I cannot fathom
how rehoming can be upscaled without the resources
and support that currently comes from the
Greyhound racing industry.
We're up to nine minutes. Oh
My Lord.
Okay. I can stop there.
Very good. We've got a question from, um, Steve Abel.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, can you tell us a bit more about May Hounds
and how many dogs you are, sort of rehoming, um,
and how you would want
it better assured that you'll continue to be able to do that
this legislation goes through,
and what sort of, what
that might look like from a funding point of view?
Um, I know Janice said five years for me, I would like
the natural attrition to be followed.
So I would like, if you, if racing has to be wound down,
I would like it to be wound down for five years,
but then have the, have funding for another five years.
We do get supported by Greyhound Racing New Zealand
for every dog that we bring home.
May Hounds is a group.
We, we don't have kennels. We only foster,
Right.
So for us, we can only foster based on volunteers
that we take, but we find that fostering is worth the time
because it's individual to each dog.
And we can get a really good guide on, um,
which dog matches which people, which family.
Um, so what was your question again?
Oh, that, that was just understanding the
how many dogs you're rehoming and what sort of cost that is.
Okay. So we rehome about 70 dogs a year. Yeah.
Through fostering.
Um, it would probably cost us
and, and we're all volunteers.
Yeah. So, um,
a thousand dollars a dog or 70,000
Yep. Annually
to do that.
Yep. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you very much Marie. Um, you've come to time.
We really appreciate your, um, mission.
Thank you. We on now
to David Emerson.
Morning, David. Good morning committee. Thank you.
Um, you've got 10 minutes. Time is yours.
Thank you. My name is David Emerson
and my self-employed accountant,
business consultant from Christchurch
who specialize in the racing industry.
I'm making this submission based on my business.
The proposed bill affects me
as I have approximately 30%
of my clients being Greyhound related.
I'll lose considerable amount of taxable income
with the closure of the greyhound industry, and
therefore the government will collect lease
taxes from me in the future.
This will have an enormous impact for me.
This does not only affect me,
but the vets, feed suppliers, fuel operators,
transfer operators, local businesses
and government agencies to name a shoe.
These businesses would also have reduced revenues due
to the proposed bill and could end up being closed
or staff being laid off.
The outcome of this has the potential
for increased government benefits being paid
to these individuals
or businesses with less tax the government receives due
to downsizing or closing of these businesses.
I do not believe the full economic benefit has been
considered with the proposed bill.
The proposed bill affects my
clients, the participants with having specialized assets,
they that are solely used within the Greyhound industry.
These are assets we learn worthless
or of limited value to anybody outside the industry
and will have to be disposed of.
These assets individually are extremely expensive.
They also have stock and inventory. Crowded.
Under stock is breeding females size, the male equivalent,
frozen cement and ps.
These are high quality items.
And the carrying values of the stock inventory
and the financial accounts
of my clients is a significant amount.
And with the proposed closure will be valued at zero,
a major loss to any business.
When you sell your business, you will be paid
for both assets and stock and inventory.
However, the proposed bill takes away this ride.
So it's only fair
and equitable that the financial assistance compensation is
given to persistent for both asset and inventory.
Stock. Clients have already spent large
sums upgrading their facilities
to come within the new Greyhound welfare standards
that are unique to Greyhound industry
and is of a higher standard required than
other dogs in New Zealand.
These costs will never be recovered and
therefore my clients will not get a fair return on the
investment for the outlay they have made.
Several of the participants are middle wage or older
and have only ever worked in the Greyhound industry and
therefore have no other skills in today's economy.
It'll be extremely hard for these people to find your terms
of employment with the outcome being unemployment.
Again, another cost to the government and taxpayers.
Another factor or point is what's gonna happen
to the greyhounds at closure.
The greyhounds still need to be cared for
until they're re-homed their costs for feed
vet fees and other basics.
So who's gonna be paying for this?
How are the participants going to pay mortgages
or their taxes with no income to support these costs?
How is anybody gonna pay for these items?
Financial assistance is required to enable proper care
and wealth with of the greyhounds.
We all have costs, but we do not have any income.
How are we going to survive?
The financial viability of my business
and other businesses could be destroyed
with the proposed bill.
I respectfully request
that the select committee seriously consider
reversing the decision to close Greyhound racing industry
for the raising for the reasons stated in this submission.
Further points, information and recommendations are
provided my written recommendation and submission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh,
we have a question here from, uh, Tangi.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you David for, um,
a very good submission.
Um, one of the issues
that obviously if this bill is successful will need to be,
uh, considered as the issue of compensation.
Uh, and at 0.4 of your submission, you talk about
what I think effectively is consideration of,
of a time bound asset, um, sort
of compensation consideration.
Right. So, so you're saying that effectively up
until the moment where the possibility of,
of the band being announced at that point, anything prior to
that should be up for some form of consideration in terms
of an industry specific asset.
Is that correct? Correct.
And, and assets that may have, I imagine they might be
small number post that date not up for consideration.
Uh, no, I think all should be
because you'll find that lot of the, my clients have some
of these equipment you've got pre-order.
So some of these, uh, equipment, like it could be lasers
and things like that to treat the, uh,
greyhounds have all already been pre-purchase
and may need come from overseas.
So I don't think you can just take it from a set state.
I think you need to look at and,
and look at the economic life of that asset.
So, uh, you, so you essentially,
you're saying they're gonna be have stranded assets and
Correct. Totally,
yeah.
And, and, and these could be up to hundreds of thousands.
Is there, do you know, has there been any assessment of
what the value of these is by the industry body?
Uh, yes, I believe so.
There has been some done, yes. Okay.
Well, we'll question racing New Zealand when they, uh,
come forward to talk to you about that.
I guess any further questions?
No, thank you David. No, thank,
thanks very much for your time.
Thank You. Really appreciate that.
Um, now we've got, uh, Darren Williams
who is here in person, I believe.
Yeah, it's better to have it on than not.
Uh, thank you. Good
Morning, Darren. Um,
welcome to the committee.
Um, you have 10 minutes allocated
and use your time's up for you.
So way to go. Thank you.
Um, so my name's Darren Williams.
I've been in the, uh, racing industry for 42 years,
predominantly in standard breeds.
Uh, come over to the greyhound racing industry
because in my mind it was being treated unfairly
through this review process.
And I wanted to help, uh, have race greyhounds and,
and had some myself over the years.
Uh, I don't propose to, to go through my submission.
You've got, and I take it that you've read it,
but I do want to concentrate on a couple of words today.
Those two words are fear
and just fear being impartial, balanced, adhering
to principles and objective rules.
Just an impartial
and predictable application of those rules.
Focusing on what is right and deserved these two words, fear
and just should be in my mind the bread
and butter of lawmakers.
I wanna look at those two words
and invite the members of the select committee
to look at them in relation to the development consequences
of the bill that is before you.
Now firstly, the process.
The process is not fair
and just the last review was
2021 when that was set.
That's four and a half years ago. Coming up five.
Greyhound racing industry has made giant strides in
that time was required to report
to the minister every quarter
and has done so with extensive report.
At no point during that process
was there any feedback from the minister.
At no point was there any target set,
even though the industry made leaps and bounds.
What we were asking is to be judged on where we are now
and the industry has, and the,
and the progress that this industry has made.
We have generations
of people involved getting emotional myself talk generations
of people involved in particularly young people
that know nothing bar than new standards.
The new welfare standards which lead the way in this
industry, the racing industry.
I'm talking about the racing integrity Board,
the watchdog appointed has for multiple times
orally said to us that we lead the way in this industry,
but not committed that to paper.
That's a good question as to why that hasn't happened.
Welfare standards, as I say, we lead the way.
We have traceability of every dog in the country.
A hundred percent.
We have standards in place for every aspect of a dog.
And make no mistake,
whilst the greyhound breed is a good pet, they are good pets
because of the racing industry.
Those dogs are handled daily, are racing dogs,
sees a vet every time it races before and after.
Some of them race twice a week.
Those stocks are ing that a hundred times a year.
That is not common for the pet industry.
Rehoming, that's predominantly my role.
I manage the Rehoming teams
and the agencies across the country.
We are very proud of what we do.
697 dogs that adopted last year.
Our statistics
for Greyhound Race New Zealand are publicly available
to anyone as are all of our reports.
Quarterly reports. Our welfare, our welfare teams reports,
and our independent welfare panels reports
697 dogs as far as we know, is the second highest number
of dogs adopted in this country.
Perhaps the SBCA, but we don't know
'cause they don't give us any figures.
Yeah. Um, import a Greyhound product,
there is absolutely no way
that anyone can hold their head high.
From an integrity point of view,
if you are banning a sport in New Zealand
and allowing imported product to come into the country
and profit from it, that profit $44 million a year
will be distributed by and TOB.
But the other two codes who have done nothing to earn it,
surely that is a matter of principle.
Um, euthanasia. This is something we're hot on.
Greyhound racing has a stringent euthanasia policy,
so stringent that it become law.
The day that the announcement was made, the law
that was drafted and passed through the house is Greyhound,
new Zealand's policy that was already in place.
Now that law, according to the minister, was
to stop mass destruction of greyhounds, which trainers
and owners could not do under the rules anyway.
But what's important here is the Minister
of Advisory Committee have recommended that,
that the law be revoked once the bill comes into being,
returning a adopted dog to the same status
as any other dog in the community, subject to the whim
of its owner, to euthanizes it.
That is unacceptable to our people who look
after these dogs for their life.
And it is an indictment on anyone
to force us into a situation
where there is a law to prevent it.
Yet they revoke it later on.
Our people, our people have been left hanging
for 13 months now with no indication of
what is going to happen.
I have myself sat in about five hours, five single hours
of meetings with the ministerial advisory committee.
We are no further ahead.
One of those meetings was about advertising
dogs first thing.
They have no dogs, they have no
people, they have no structure.
We have nothing at all to suggest how this will work.
Greyhound Race in New Zealand has an entrenched system
of managing these docks.
How will affect me?
Well, firstly, I won't have a job like everyone else.
Um, I've, I will feel like I haven't achieved anything.
'cause we have gone to the nth degree as required
and have not got anywhere.
So it feels like it was pre a premeditated decision anyway.
But one of the things that's affected me mostly is I've been
a taxpayer my whole life and a voter my whole life.
I won't be be voting in this election.
I'm completely disenchanted with the process here.
We are asked to report, we have no guidelines,
we have no limits, we have no engagement.
And it would seem, regardless of what we do,
that this is happening anyway to me as a person
that has completely taken me away from the political system.
And I, I take pride in, in, in trying
to bring myself up to date.
I watched all of the addresses in Parliament the other day,
particularly Winston, on the basis
that he might say something about
greyhounds, which of course he didn't.
Um, yeah, that, as I say, the, the rest
of the stuff's in my submission.
I'm happy to take questions.
Yeah, I've got a question from Steve Abel.
Um, you said very powerful written and oral submission
and uh, it can be certain we're hearing you.
Yeah, yeah. And, um, there's two things,
two specific things I wanna ask about is, um,
you have no certainty you've articulated to us about
what will become of the existing Greyhound, uh,
industry rehoming program.
Um, it seems obvious to me
that there should be a recommendation of this committee
that we, uh, are best that that, that
those are the people best suited to continue the rehoming.
Um, I'm, I'm meant we to yet
to discuss that with my colleagues.
Um, what do you,
I know you have pretty substantial figures on
what costs the current REHOMING program.
Um, I'll ask you to elucidate the committee,
um, on that.
Yep. But secondly, I also wanna make the point that, um,
it's certainly the position of the Green Party
that there's a total hypocrisy in us allowing the ongoing
betting on Greyhound racing in Australia.
And it will be our position that we, uh, advise against
that proceeding, um, to,
'cause that is an obvious hypocrisy.
Um, and I hope that my colleagues will agree with
that position as well as advice to the,
to the minister on that specific point.
But could you, um, about the rehoming,
presuming this is going ahead.
Yep. So from a funding point of view, uh,
because I know the other code harness very well, um,
and I know some of the jurisdictions in Australia
for thoroughbreds, so take New South Wales,
thoroughbreds probably the biggest
jurisdiction outside of Asia.
They allocate 2% of race stakes to welfare.
Greyhound racing New Zealand allocates 26% of all
of its funding to wealthier 26%.
And evidently that's not enough.
Um, that's about eight
and a half million dollars
that greyhounds racing New Zealand contributes
to the wellbeing of those greyhounds after closure
and include after racing, I should say,
and including Desex Dental, um, operational systems
and everything else to put a dog into a home
and includes our America project
and a couple of other things.
Um, Greyhound racing New Zealand at
one of the first meetings
with the ministerial advisory committee suggested
that the best group of people to look
after these dogs were the people that already were doing it
because they knew what they were doing
and the trainers were the safest place to leave the dogs
until they were taken by by the agencies.
We gave the ministerial advisory committee a detailed
report, including all costings on what that would be,
and that total was 40 million.
The recommendation of the Ministerial advisory Committee 60,
um, what we said was that it was far safer for those dogs
to be wound down over a period of time if,
if indeed the industry was to be shut, stop breeding
and wind the industry down.
So continue to race until the stock had run out of,
of racing stock, which would've generated income to pay
for the wind down and pay for the rehoming
of the dogs instead of taxpayers having to pay,
which is the case now.
That would've been far safer.
These dogs are born to run, having them exercised every day
as something that needs to happen.
And those dogs need to be wound down through the system.
One of the questions that you asked earlier
on was how long it takes.
And as Janice and Marie quite rightfully pointed out,
it's an individual dog.
The dog's an individual. It's not a unit,
it's an alive animal that needs to be assessed
and put into a home safely.
It needs to go to someone that can here
for this particular dog.
Just like any other dog, I've got a Jack Russell at home
and it's half mad if it went into a
home that it didn't bike.
I mean, we've all got animals like that.
No one wants an animal to be hurt.
But I think one of the, the last point I would like
to make is wherever there is animal activity,
there is going to be some form
of injury in some form of euthanasia.
But the greyhound racing industry,
in my mind is the only industry that reports statistics.
No one else does. Dog agility, polo,
equestrian horse racing mounted police.
Do you know the euthanasia of mounted police?
Do you know what injuries they do?
You know what the crusaders, horses
that come off the off the field, what injury they might have
after they've run around with flags fly.
There will always be injury of animals.
It's about having some sort of assessment of that
and judging what is safe.
If we take it to the nth degree
and the anti groups continue where we are going,
you won't have fly fishing, you won't be putting a hook
through a fish's face and saying it's too small
and throwing it back into the ocean in the hope
that it lives, it will be taken
to some ridiculous nth degree.
There needs to be some sort of objectivity
around what we are doing.
And Greyhound racing New Zealand
Has standards above anyone else.
Thank you very much, Darren. Um, you've come to time.
I think it was very powerful submission
and we really appreciate the work that you put into it.
No problem. Thank you. Thank you. Outstanding. Thank you.
Thank you. Right.
We're moving on to, uh, Joanna Hardy
Ki Kiwi Hounds.
Is that in person? Ah, yes.
Morning Joanna. Welcome to the committee.
Um, 10 minutes been allocated far away.
Good morning. Thank you for, um,
inviting me to present today.
My name is, um, Joanna Hardy, although I do prefer Joe.
My, um, association with the Greyhound Racing Industry is
that I am a licensed owner,
although I don't have a current racing dog at the moment.
I'm also the adoptions coordinator for Kiwi Kiwi
Cos Adoption Trust.
We are one of the adoption partners
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
And you forgive me, I'm incredibly nervous.
It's, it's alright, Tony doesn't bite.
About seven years ago, a group of friends got together
and asked how we could become further involved in
and contribute to the Greyhound racing industry.
And as such, the Force Rehoming group adoption partner
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand was born.
Um, we have been a rehoming partner since 2020,
not 2000 that we wrote by mistake in our submission.
Um, in this time we've traveled to many Greyhound properties
around the south island.
We've worked closely with owners and trainers
and we have established excellent relationships with them.
The current rehoming model, great mates
that you've heard spoken of this morning, is the key
to success in Greyhound race in
Greyhound rehoming in this country.
Once greyhounds have retired from racing,
and please do bear in mind
that sometimes greyhounds don't actually
make it to the racetrack.
Sometimes in their pre-training they're shown to be too slow
or they just don't lack the desire to chase
the lure that goes around the track.
Um, once this has happened,
the dogs will enter the Great Mates Rehoming program.
Now the vast majority of greyhounds entering the Rehoming
program pass their temperament assessments straight away.
According to data from the 24 25 Greyhound racing season,
85.7% of greyhounds are assessed as green.
And so therefore they are deemed, um, ready to be rehomed
and they're allocated to rehoming groups such as our own.
Uh, 12.96 are assessed as amber
and 1.35% are assessed as red.
Now these amber and red dogs, these are not bad dogs.
These are not aggressive dogs.
These are dogs that may
need some work on their social skills, not unlike some
of the human counterparts, if you like,
they might be slightly anxious
and they might need some more experience with life.
Um, and this aspect Greyhound racing in New Zealand will
provide, will employ qualified canine behaviorists
to help them become the best pets that they can be.
There is no time limit placed on these greyhounds.
It takes as long as it takes.
The point I'm trying to make is
that there is no magic wand waved over greyhounds
during the rehoming process.
They are who they are because of the love, care,
and attention they have received every single day
of their lives prior to coming into Rehoming.
Some greyhounds may be shy and not the life
and soul of the party, but they should never be seen
as a bad thing because greyhounds are individuals
and need to be treated as such.
It is imperative that if ban on Greyhound racing goes
forward, that forward that the greyhounds are rehomed
by those most experienced with a breed.
And that being the current great Mates re-homing program
and the four partnered re-homing groups, the organizations
who know the greyhounds little quirks
and what makes them special, it understands them
and is prepared to work with each individual greyhound
that may perhaps need more life skills.
It's not a process that should be rushed so that those
who have been in favor
of the ban can pat themselves on the back
and say we've banned Greyhound racing.
The Greyhounds have been re-homed in record time
with zero thought
or consequence to what the future will hold
for those greyhounds
currently Greyhound racing New Zealand
and the Great Mates Rehoming program, we look after our own.
If there is an issue with the Greyhound
that is placed into a home
and that family circumstances change, um,
the dog is accepted back in, into the Rehoming group
from which it originated from,
and then that Rehoming group will financially support
that dog until it has found a new home.
How will Greyhounds be protected should a family
circumstances change
after say the transition agency has rehomed
their last Greyhound?
The Greyhound adoption groups have no more greyhounds
to adopt and close this alone will create a far
greater welfare issue
for the Greyhounds than the ban from Greyhound racing claims
to protect them from the concern for the welfare of racing.
Greyhounds should not stop once the last
Greyhound is Greyhound.
So the racing industry, um,
amendment Bill does remove protections
that the greyhounds are currently afforded under the care
and operation of GRNZ via the Great Mates Rehoming program
as it is currently drafted.
The bill has no mention of any concrete rehoming structure,
including no plan if a greyhounds placement in a home falls
through after they are deemed by the bill
and the transitional agency
to have been successfully re-homed,
this will plunge them into the volatile
and already overburdened, um, animal rehoming sector,
which already euthanize tens of thousands
of animals each year.
Uh, about a year ago, Kiwi Kiwi Hounds, um,
received a phone call from a family.
We adopted a dog too.
Her name was Lynn
and she's a delightful little black Greyhound.
Um, the owners were absolutely beside themselves
because their circumstances had changed
and she needed to have a new home.
They were able to have her stay with them
until we found her home.
So we financially supported that family until the time
that we did find her a new home.
So we got her new dental treatment,
we updated her vaccinations, we paid for feed for the stock
while we were looking to find her a new home.
Happy to report she now lives on a lifestyle
block way down south.
Having the time of her life.
Um, how the band will affect me personally, well,
clearly I'll be out of a job.
So, um, I forgot to mention earlier,
I am also employed in the Greyhound racing industry, um, at
the Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club hub.
Um, it will create a significant financial impact, um,
for me, what the con the contribution that I can make
to my family.
Um, not all the skills I've gained in the industry are
easily transferable to other industries.
Um, my own mental health has suffered greatly from the
uncertainty of my future, my family's future,
and the future of our industry.
Currently, I see colleagues
and friends who I care for deeply struggle
with their mental health and seeing this decline
stresses me a great deal.
Asab Bill is currently drafted.
There's no support for, if the banner is put through to,
to secure the safety and wellbeing of our community.
There needs to be concrete mental health support plan
for those who are about to lose their livelihoods.
Uh, often multiple families will live on the
same property.
So for example, a grandfather, his children
and their their children, they're all part
of the greyhounds racing industry.
Um, so the band will have a multi-generational effect
on those families.
However, what does unite us is our love for our greyhounds,
our incredibly kind, loving
and huge hearted greyhounds
who are the true heroes of our industry.
If it wasn't for the love, care,
and attention that they have received every day
of their lives by those who loved them first,
they would not be the incredible animals that they are now.
So in summary, I'd like
to say racing greyhounds are loved racing.
Greyhounds are cherished racing. Greyhounds are dogs.
Dogs need a job and they love theirs.
Racing Greyhounds have a purpose.
They have a career and currently they have an
outstanding rehoming program.
After the band comes into effect, what will they have?
Thank you.
Thanks very much Joe.
Um, I have a question, uh, around the Rehoming.
So have you, your group
or any of the other, um, groups that you know of
that do the Rehoming had interaction with the, uh,
ministerial advisory committee at all around this?
We've had, uh, five as I recall, meetings
with the ministerial advisory committee.
And the outcome was,
The outcome is that we are, um,
we are no further along than
what we were on the day that the ban was announced.
We have no idea of their plans.
Right. Got one Steve. Yes, she's agreed.
So you, and it's not clear to you whether they're intending
to support you continuing to be able to do rehome.
That's correct, yes. Yep. Thank you. And Kiwi.
Kiwi Hounds, um,
not unlike May Hounds was already mentioned.
We run, um, entirely volunteer based. Yep.
Thank you. Um, thank you very much. Sorry.
Um, we're we've um, come to time. Thank you.
You really appreciate um,
the effort you've made. You did very
Well. Thank you. Thanks
John. Yeah, thank you.
Moving on.
We now have um,
Andrew Grieve who's here in person I believe.
Good morning everyone. Thank you for the opportunity.
Uh, thanks for coming. Welcome.
I've also got 15 copies of what I'm going to read. Um,
So you got 10 minutes, so the times', times yours, um,
the clerk will pass those for you.
Yeah. Thank you.
Um, I have been driving the Race Lu for over 20 years.
That's me driving a straight track yesterday
that's in the middle of a race.
Um, I'm also a licensed judge
and photo finish operator.
I have seen many improvements over the years
as mentioned in my submission.
The vast improvement was the building
of new straight track in Nui
and an investment of $2.5 million.
The straight track has around a third
of injuries off oval tracks with most minor, uh,
most injuries minor.
Another benefit of a straight track
as it has a catching pin.
The dogs don't finish on the lure. There's the catching pen.
There has a gate, there's a finish line.
Far, far safer, no dogs falling in the lure.
The figure of 800 of dogs SPCA
and activists are throwing around is incorrect.
There are 800 dogs called for a vet check each year.
Hundreds of dogs fall at the lure as it's slowing down
because they're all budging up front.
Get it. This is a low speed fall.
However, this industry is so regulated and transparent.
Each dog that falls at Le Lua is called for a vet check
with most cleared of injury
but still receiving a mandatory five day stand.
And because it had a vet check,
I see the dogs walking back happy after falling at lure
and racing the following week.
Many other dogs called vet checks are
also cleared of injury.
Domestic dogs that fall don't get vet checks.
Children that fall over playing don't get rushed to a doctor
to get checked, get greyhounds do.
The welfare of dogs has increased
and exceeds what the government
and the Racing Integrity Unit asks.
As an example, I adopted an 18 month gray,
18 month old Greyhound that, um,
brokers leg in two places playing in a paddock
aged three months.
That's Jasper and the cast
as Jasper's Repairs.
Pretty significant the investment was $9,000 by j
and z just for the vet bill.
And then there was a year of rehabilitation as Jasper.
Now that's also his vet
records are starting at three months.
So that shows During's commitment and care.
The proposed ban is so wrong.
It is destroying livelihoods careers,
taking away people's investments.
Some trainers are third generation and it's
although known many are unlikely to find another job due
to age, location
and having dogs to care for while waiting for them
to go into specialized rehoming agencies, myself
and many other in the industry.
For how many suicides will result
from the ban if it goes ahead.
Personally, I am unlikely to find suitable work due
to the severity, severity of my injuries
and only been able to work a few hours.
My specialist agree.
An example of that, I was talking
to the on track Greyhound vet, uh, on Friday
who stated she's going to lose 80% of her income.
She doesn't know how she'll provide for her children.
She attends all the Greyhound meetings
and sees the dogs afterwards as well.
Have any of you ever gone
and watched Greyhound racing,
seen the aftercare the dogs receive
or taken time to go to a trainer's home
and seen how much care the dogs receive,
how happy the dogs are and the investment the dogs love
and want to run and race.
They turn up happy wagging tails and still do so
after the race or trials, I see it, I see everything
'cause I'm controlling it.
Obviously you can't force a greyhound to race
or run unlike horses that are whipped.
My specific concerns are
the one turn tracks like at Palmerston North
and the new straight track at Wonga.
DOI should be allowed to continue racing
as a much safer than the two turn tracks.
With more straight tracks built, creating further jobs
and investment, the government should not be allowed
to seize JNZ assets and give them to the thoroughbred code.
This is legalized theft.
Nowhere in the history of New Zealand has anybody been able
to seize the assets of a legitimate business.
Not doing anything wrong.
If greyhound racing is banned, the same should apply
to the Thoroughbred Code and Rodeo as the injury
and euthanasia rate is much higher close to double
the TAB should not be allowed to continue
to broadcast 48,000 Australian
Greyhound races into New Zealand.
If Greyhound racing is banned,
this is an absolute kick in the guts.
It's hypocritical
and it proves the ban is not about welfare.
Lastly, the SPCA must not be allowed
to be involved in rehoming of Greyhounds.
They're nothing like other breeds
and the SPCA have a high euthanasia rate,
which are not transparent about.
Thank you. Thanks very much Andrew. Is there any questions?
Uh, Tony? Yeah, thank you.
Um, some of the questions today have been about the level
of engagement with, um, the minister of Advisory committee.
You, you are in a unique situation
where you are a licensed holder for a particular purpose.
Yep. On course. What extent, if any, have you had in terms
of engagement or connection with um, the Mac?
Absolutely nothing. I've heard nothing from anyone.
No support. Um, the only support I did have,
and that was because I chose to have it, that was
with an on track, um, support person, um,
clinical work, not clinical register
psychiatrist, whatever he was.
Um, when the band came in, I went and saw him.
I had three sessions with him
and I walked away feeling extremely disillusioned by trade.
I'm a fitter turner machinist.
I had to give that up due to my injuries.
And um, he turned around
and he says, when you're a teenager, you know,
you got your apprenticeship, you invented yourself.
I'm 58 years old now.
He says, you can reinvent yourself
again starting your career.
I says, like what? He couldn't answer it.
I dunno what I'm going to do.
And I fear for so many in the industry as well.
That's all they know.
Thank you. The time for stop on that. Yeah, quick.
Yeah, I mean it's just to acknowledge,
I think it's a very clear message we've got here today about
that component of the care for the people in the industry
and what does that practically look like for you?
So we hear you allowed it clear on that.
Um, it's definitely something we have to think long
and hard about what that practically looks like. Mm-hmm.
Personally, I think an extension on a band
or allowing a straight track, you know,
I mean the straight track is where the future is.
And JZ have committed that they'll build more.
You know, there was one proposed to be built in Ashburton
and there was also talk of one in Cambridge,
but obviously, you know, due to length of build it.
Yeah.
I thank you very much. Alright. Um, for your time today.
I really appreciate your, uh, submission as,
as that he does.
Yep. And um, I wish you well.
Thank you very much. Alright,
we now have Michael Schneider, who is here as well.
Good morning, Michael. Good morning.
Welcome to committee. Good
Morning everyone.
I've talked along
because I had the pleasure of actually, um,
being responsible for this breeding
and I close friends with, um, the owners
and everyone involved with him and all the litter.
So, um, I am a licensed, I started off as a licensed starter
handler owner trainer, um, breeder and litter master.
The first Greyhound that came into my life was in 2013.
He was a gorgeous big boy.
We called Ziggy and his racing name was 10 tens.
We were lucky enough to get him directly from the trainer
and saw firsthand the high level of care and he
and all the other racing greyhounds received.
Personally, I was going through a rough patch
and to this day I credit him
with not only enriching our family life,
but also saving mine.
I now am here
before you today in an effort to repay that debt.
I'm here to try my best
to help save the incredible Greyhound community,
both retired and racing,
and the many greyhounds that this bill.
And then we put risk.
This bill presented under the disguise
of welfare will do nothing for the welfare
of our greyhounds or our people.
It will, however, cause the destruction of our community,
a way of life, livelihoods, assets, substantial investments
of some of the hardest working, dedicated greyhound,
loving New Zealanders, many
of whom I've had the pleasure to meet and now call friends.
No one gets into Greyhound racing to get rich.
It will also end the Greyhound breeders.
We know it in lover New Zealand, both racing and retired.
I can't even imagine my life without a greyhound in it.
Yet this bill
and ban, as it stands, goes ahead.
This will be the reality.
The bill views our beloved hounds as a problem
to be hopefully quickly re-homed without the continued
protection that they now have
for their entire precious lives.
This bill falsely assumes
that Rehoming ends when a greyhound is first rehomed
and under this bill, that's when its protection ends.
We and the current Rehoming agencies
know this is not the case.
If the ban were to proceed,
then the current ex experienced rehoming agencies must
continue to be properly funded for the next 10 to 15 years.
Anything less is less than they receive. Now.
The New Zealand economy also can't afford the loss
of the 159 million per year.
The impact will be devastating to for participants,
including paid staff, trainers, owners,
and supporting small businesses.
This bill and its proponents seem more concern
of the negative financial impact on the other two equine
codes because to add insult to injury,
while banning greyhound racing in New Zealand, it then wants
to continue to profit from Greyhound racing from Australia.
This is morally repugnant.
All this without the proper consultation
that should have been afforded us
and would've shown that not only have we met all
that has been asked from us in the past,
but we have also continued working towards reducing our
already industry leading low industry leading injury
and euthanasia rates.
Paragraph 90 of the Robertson report specifically stated
that a full scale inquiry is required
to assess all consequences of the actions of a ban,
which are wider than the greyhound welfare.
Yet here we are today, no inquiry,
not even an attempt at proper consultation, including those
who really know our greyhounds,
our people, and our community.
Excuse me. So what can be done?
One, we, our greyhounds
and the community deserve a proper
and fully inclusive inquiry before this bill
or ban should continue.
Two straight track racing should be excluded
from the bill and ban.
This bill and ban have been said to be solely due
to welfare concerns regarding injuries.
However, straight tracks have a fraction
of the injury rates of circuit tracks,
and any injuries are not to the same degree.
In the RBS report of December 22, table seven states
that 68% of all injuries occurred while entering, during
or exiting curves.
The injury rate at the Wgnu straight track is only a third
of the average injury rate of circuit tracks.
The injuries are of a lower severity,
and to date, there has not been a single race fall
or an injury requiring euthanasia.
Get rid of the bins and you get rid of the problem.
GRNZ have been planning,
and this, sorry, G-G-R-N-Z have been planning
and has the means to transition
to straight track racing alone if given the opportunity.
In fact, they were planning the construction
of a second straight track in Ash Burton when the
band was suddenly announced.
If strike track racing could continue, then we wouldn't
have the negative impact on the economy.
Decimation of a community, extinction
of a breed in New Zealand, nor a major rehoming problem.
Remember, with the, with the flood
of Greyhounds needing homes
and hopefully getting them other dogs also needing homes
will miss out and pay the ultimate price.
The Auckland City Council euthanized 3%
of the Auckland dog population per year.
And the SPCA refuses to publish their data.
So you can assume that the reality is worse.
If this band were to continue for all types of racing,
then there must be proper funding
and investment in the current experience.
Rehoming agencies for the full lifetime
of the current racing population
with some puppies not even being a year old, that will need
to be in place for the next 10 to 15 years, anything less.
And you have eroded their protection
and welfare from what it is now.
There also needs to be a fair
and proper compensation to all those
who invested in property, facilities, transport, et cetera,
having willingly done so to raise meat
and in cases exceed the required welfare improvements.
Asked of us personally.
My wife and I have planned our future around the purchase
of a property to breed one litter every two
or three years in our retirement.
We have brought the property so to do so,
but now our future plans have been stolen from us.
We still need the property as it will need
as we'll need the space when we get our puppies home.
When they retire, my wife and I and three friends own
and raise seven of our puppies from our first
and unfortunately, probably last ever litter.
They're three and a half years old now
and all have loving homes to go to together.
We contribute over a thousand dollars per week into the
economy, supporting wages, small businesses and suppliers.
That's over $52,000 per year
and so far, 182,000 over the last three
and a half years, we've been fortunate that they've managed
to pay their way and we even have some savings
for their retirement put aside in 10 years, the joy
that greyhounds have brought into our lives and our fu
and our future as we hoped will be gone.
However, if this bill can exclude straight track racing,
then we, our dogs and our community have a future.
We can continue to contribute
and continue to have the joy that a greyhound
or two brings into our lives.
Thank you. Any questions,
Uh, dear? There's
time for one quick question if anyone has one. No.
Can I just, no, no. Um, thank you.
From your submission again on, um, compensation,
you've identified sort of the, uh, compensation applying to
licensed greyhound trainers, breeders, boomers.
Do you think that sort of covers the, the i i look there,
there are lots of small businesses.
I know in some of the tracks there are small businesses
providing catering and that's all they do.
And without the greyhounds, they have no business.
So there are lots of knock on effect.
I mean, the, the figure of 158 million per year,
I assume would, would include, you know, the broad extent
of the impact the industry, the positive impact you
of the industry has on the community.
So I'm sure someone can probably do the figures,
but that's kind of where, sorry.
Thanks very much Michael. We're outta time. No worries.
Really appreciate, um, that submission.
We're gonna take a break to 10 and we come back.
Um, and we'll be hearing from Marcy flip when we come back
10 or 10, eight.
We're gonna,
we are now going to hear from Marcy Flynn.
Oh, don't be, it's not scary.
We are not, we're not scary people.
Um, so what, uh, we've allocated 10 minutes,
so the time is yours.
Okay. Um, thank you
for giving me this opportunity to speak today.
Um, I do really appreciate it.
My name is Marcy Flip and I'm 58 years old from Foxton
and I'm a public Greyhound trainer.
I've been in the Greyhound industry for 28 years.
This band does not only mean an end to greyhound racing,
but an end to people's livelihoods, family businesses,
and eventually the greyhounds themselves.
It is not about us losing our job.
It is a snowball effect that it will have on the economy
that has not even being considered.
The closure has already impacted me heavily
with my dog numbers going from around 60
to now 30 in my care.
A value of the 60 at the time was around $300,000.
I can't just pick up my laptop and my diary
and walk out the gate.
I'm responsible for those dogs until they go into our
re-homing program, which will take months, if not years,
with no income after the 31st of July 26th.
As there is no transition in place,
I'm already worried about how I will care for these dogs
and pay my mortgage and other weekly costs that I have.
I bought my property 11 years ago
and have built it from nothing to the setup
that it is today.
And what do I do with the assets I have
to run my Greyhound operation?
$180,000 worth at the moment
to lose not only money on them,
but in reality probably end up losing my property as well.
The rateable value has already dropped $80,000 in the last
12 months, which brings a property down
to only now $680,000.
I do not have a partner to back me up
and help out financially.
I have done this all on my own
and it's my life now for what
to have it ripped away from me
and end up in financial disaster
because of a minority of people feeding lies that we,
the real people with the real facts
have been totally ignored.
I cannot believe that a country that I was once proud
to live in, being a New Zealander can have a government
that has the power to take away people's livelihoods,
businesses, and ruin people's lives.
Not only are people's livelihoods at stake,
but the Greyhound breed itself
will eventually become extinct in New Zealand.
Every rehomed dog is desexed.
There have been no PS bread in the last 12 months.
So there is the start of extinction
for greyhounds in New Zealand.
And how can you be going
to allow betting on Australian greyhound racing
to continue when you are closing the New Zealand industry
because of welfare issues
when we are already more regulated than Australia?
Is that not double standards?
I'll give you a little example on something
that is very close to my heart.
I have a long time owner that raced a very good race b***h.
He wanted to breed a litter when she retired.
We missed the first two times.
And on the third attempt,
after getting special permission
as once a b***h turns seven, you have to get a vet clearance
and put an application to a committee
and be granted permission to breed.
We had a litter of five.
One of the pups when she was three months old,
broke her leg at home in the paddock
under our rules of racing.
We were not allowed to euthanize her
and she had to have surgery at our cost,
which we happily paid.
A few months later, after the leg had held,
she broke the same leg at home again,
but a bit higher up back off to the vet again
and more surgery at our cost.
And that healed as well.
Then one day she coughed some blood in her kennel.
So back off to the vet again for a scope
and put on medication for a month.
At this stage, the vet bills had got up to around 15,000
and another 5,000 for rearing her
and her future as a race dog was not looking likely,
and this is where the straight track racing comes into play.
Straight track racing is the safest racing by far.
Greyhound's love to run.
And I have proved that accidents can happen at home too.
Under guidance from the vets and the specialized equipment.
I have to make sure my dogs are at peak
fitness when they race.
We managed to get Dolly to the races two days ago, was one
of the proudest moments in my training career.
When Dolly Drama won her first race.
It wasn't about the money as we'll,
never recover costs on her, but it was the look on her face.
She was so darn happy tail wagging
and everyone coming up to pat her after her win.
We love our dogs and they love to race.
So how can we decide our future as the bill is drafted?
There is no concrete plan for the welfare of our people
or our dogs and no compensation for assets.
So I'm asking the select committee to seriously consider
the reversing of the closure of the greyhound industry
or an extension on the closure to allow the 230 odd pups
that were born after the proposed ban was announced
to be able to have some future
return on an investment.
This is in your hands now
and we need answers from you so that the thousands
of people this ban is going to affect can move forward, uh,
in life before it's too late.
Thank you.
Thanks very much, Marcy.
That's a very powerful submission.
Uh, do you have a question to Yes, thank you
Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you Marcy.
Um, in your written submission, uh, if,
if the bill does go ahead, you,
and you've just touched on the compensation issue in
particular around the assets, and you've given some examples
of specific assets that you yourself have, have as a result
of, um, your training operations, the establishment
of a government supported buyback or disposal scheme.
Do you wanna just talk us through how you would see
that working?
So I'm not quite understanding what you are,
you are saying there as far as, so are you saying,
so the government would buy the assets off us
and then,
but what would the government then do with the assets?
Like I'm talking, I've got five like treadmills. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Um, very heavy machinery, um, walk up
to say, takes seven dogs at a time.
You know, you can work seven at a time,
but they, they take up a lot of space
and like that.
They just, they are for that specific, uh,
for greyhound training even.
I don't know, even if humans, 'cause they only go one speed.
Um, humans couldn't even,
you couldn't even use it for a human.
Um, yes, it would be great to,
to get some compensation back for the assets
because we, you know, otherwise they're worthless.
But then what is it,
what is the government going to actually do with them?
That's my concern is what you would do with it afterwards
because it's, we need that gear to, to for our greyhounds.
So if, if I can just get some clarity.
'cause what you're saying is you ask the committee
to establish a government supported buyback
or disposal scheme.
So, um, what I'm taking from
that is you're saying if this bill is gonna go ahead,
then effectively you want the government
to establish a scheme
where they would give financial compensation in exchange
for the assets that you've just outlined,
because, am I reading that correctly? Yeah,
Well that would be, yes.
If we can get compensation,
any compensation is better than no compensation and,
and at the moment we are getting no compensation
for anything anywhere.
So any compensation would is better than none.
Thank you. There's, if there's any further questions?
Oh, yeah. Enough for a quick one. Yeah.
Hey, look, um, thanks for that submission.
It, um, is, uh, some, you know, quite serious concerns
that you raised and thank you, thank
you for sharing the committee.
Certainly, um, helpful for me to, to hear that from you,
just in terms of the, the impact, um, in terms of you saying
that if the ban is not lifted
to allow an additional 12 month period,
would you give us just an indication of how that,
what difference that would make
for you having an additional 12 months, um, as opposed to,
you know, there has obviously been an indication
that this ban is coming for a while now.
Yeah, well, I've, I've got some, some pups like, I mean,
I, yeah, I breed, I do breed pups
and got some pups that come July.
They're only going to be three
and a half years old when they're three and a half.
They're only in their prime of racing.
And, you know, we had the first purpose
for breeding these animals is to race.
The second purpose is to find them loving homes,
but they're not going to see their term out of their racing.
And I have a 12 month old puppet at home
and an 18 month old pup.
He's 18 months at the moment.
Um, he might make it to the races just
before the band comes in, but he'll only maybe get three
or four months racing the, the pup.
She will, she probably won't, she won't, you have
to be 16 months old before you can actually go to the races.
So, and once the ban was announced, there was 230 pups that
were on the ground and they are not,
they're not gonna get their opportunity.
We've still, um, you know, we've read them
and it's, it's not cheap to rear puffs.
And so it's all this cost that,
and we are not going to be able to recoup any of it back.
I mean, Dolly, she was a huge cost, but,
and we're not worried about getting it all back
because we are never gonna get it back.
But it's the fun and, and the passion and everything,
and that's why we do it.
And, and we can't even send them over to Australia, um,
because the airlines won't fly.
So that's another issue that we have is, oh, you know,
we can't just pick up and go over there because we can't,
because the airlines, unless you wanna get in a boat
and row it with your dogs, you can't even get over there.
So I think it's only fair that
because we haven't bred for the, for 12 months, like
for the last 12 months we haven't read anything.
So there's no more to, no more to come through.
But those ones that were born, when the day that
that proposed van was announced, they're the ones
that are gonna miss out and it's still at like
huge expense for everybody.
Um, and they're gonna miss out.
They were born, they were born to race,
and then it's not gonna happen.
So to, to it should be,
it would be great if they were allowed to have a, a wee bit
of time, you know, and,
and it just gives everybody more time to,
to work out what is actually gonna happen.
Thanks, mate. Thanks very much for your submission.
We really appreciate it. Thank you, Marcy.
You did, you did well. Uh,
next we've got Stuart Duggan in Yes, in
Morning Stuart. Welcome to the committee.
Um, you've got 10 minutes. It's up to you now where
You go. Thank you very much.
Good morning
chair and committee members.
My name is Stuart Duggan.
I currently work at Greyhound Racing New Zealand
as the digital transformation manager.
I want to be very clear at the outset of the submission
that is coming from me personally.
Not on behalf of GRNZ.
I have worked at GRNZ
for three years following more than 20 years
of experience working across the wider racing industry
and a range of organizations.
I was employed at GRNZ to drive the technology
and data side of the business to modernize systems,
improve welfare oversight,
and to help take the gray hand code
to fully digitized business.
This work included initiatives such
as cleaning up legacy databases,
designing a comprehensive traceability system, and help and,
and, sorry, look at new technology such
as no sprint identification, which we would use to replace
the year branding of dos.
Other projects included the early stages
of exploring AI based solutions to better monitor
and understand on track injuries using the race day vision
supplied by the Trackside Racing Channel.
Some of this work was undertaken as part
of the Racing Integrity Board's monitoring program.
Other aspects were about pushing the code forward,
proactively improving welfare welfare systems.
On the 10th of December, 2024,
after the government's announcement
to close the Greyhound racing industry,
that work effectively stopped for me.
Since then, my role has shifted largely into stakeholder
communication space over the past 12 months.
As my role has evolved, this has meant
that I've had far more direct contact
with industry participants, trainers, breeders,
handlers and their families.
Families are a major part of the sport
and for some families it has been a way
of life for generations.
These families are the people who are hurting the most.
They are simply looking for some clarity
and guidance on their futures, which includes
how a closure process could actually be executed.
When the terms of reference
for the ministerial advisory committee were released,
they included clear outputs among them were
create a trans transition plan alongside key stakeholders,
work with the DIA
and the minister's office to ensure appropriate
communications are made to industry participants
and key stakeholders throughout this transition period.
The MAC has not provided either of these so far
more than a year on from the committee being formed.
There is no communicated transition plan.
There is no clear guidance for participants,
and there is no meaningful support network in place to date.
There has only been one direct communication from
MAC to participants.
That communication sought
to gauge interest in people holding onto their dogs from
1st of August until they can be rehomed
by REHOMING partners.
In practical terms, this is the only way the ongoing
rehoming effort can work Once closure has been affected.
Rehoming greyhounds is a difficult job
and the partners that GRNZ work with are world class.
Their experience over the years, combined with the systems
and processes developed during this period
ensure the right outcome for the dogs.
This is not something that can be spun up,
like the minister was told.
Charlatans or the SPCA were quick to offer guidance
to the minister on how this could all work.
And there was a supposed plan coming.
But like mac, nothing has ever been forthcoming.
There is no plan. The SPCA are not re homers
and their refusal to publish the euthanasia rates indicate
strongly what happens to many of the animals in their care.
Our participants will not hand over their dogs to the SPCA,
they will hand them over to our partners who they trust
and they've worked with for years.
Also included in the terms of reference, the MAT is tasked
with providing a blueprint to pave a way forward
for the government to close other industries in the future.
That blueprint could one day apply to the equine codes.
If that is the case, then I respectfully suggest
that the last 12 May 12 months demonstrates exactly how not
to conduct an industry closure.
Officials warn parliament of material risks to livelihoods,
communities, wellbeing
and mental health Parliament decided to proceed anyway.
No tailored provisions have been made to support us
during the closure or in its wake.
The industry mental health support service on track has been
conspicuous in its absence
and has not even made a written submission on the potential
mental health risks associated with the closure.
Every day I speak
with participants who have nowhere to turn.
They have no answers and they have no support.
And frustratingly for me
and for my organization, GRMZ,
has no answers either to give them.
We have a minister who's made the decision
but will not meet with us.
And we have a committee tasked
with overseeing a wind down transition
without an actual plan.
On a personal level, for me,
this means I'll soon be entering an already highly
competitive job market in Wellington,
following large scale government workforce.
It's pretty competitive out there,
and I've got many friends that are in the same predicament.
I have a mortgage to pay, I have two children to support.
My situation is not unique.
It reflects the reality facing many people
across our industry.
But the main difference is from the 1st of August
for our people, significant investments
and facilities, plant
and equipment will have little to no resale value.
Racing, stock and breeding activities will
become effectively worthless.
And there is no ability to recoup investment,
only an uncertain future and financial loss faces them.
I'm proud of what I've achi
what GRNZ has achieved over the past three
years since I've been here.
I'm proud of the contribution that I've made toward the,
towards these achievements.
Having worked in the industry across codes, I can tell you
that greyhounds lead the way in welfare and regulation.
But what I feel most is sadness.
An industry that has displayed the ability to improve
and meet its obligations is likely coming to an end without
so much as a, a courtesy phone call.
And the justification for closure is not credible
and relies on an undefined measure of vibes and feelings.
If activists are to be listened to,
if greyhound racing is unacceptable on welfare grounds,
how is it ethical to continue profiting from a,
from the same activity offshore?
In closing, I strongly urge this committee
to reject the legislation,
or at the very least, require substantial amendments
that include genuine engagement, fair compensation,
and a realistic properly resourced transition timeline.
Thank you. Thank you Stuart Brooke?
Um, I have a question for you
that we had earlier submitters talk about, um, engagement
with the Mac.
Yes. And they indicated they had five meetings. Yes.
And you are saying there's only been one, sorry,
clarified? No,
No. One direct
communication with participants.
So that's an email that has gone out from the MAC committee
to ask them if they would be interested in holding onto
their dogs at the 1st of August.
Okay. So that's the only engagement that you've had? Yes.
Okay. Yes. Yes. Thank you.
Are there any other questions? Can
I step on that? So
when they asked if you're interested in holding onto,
onto your dog, so they indicate any financial support for
of doing that, has there been any communication back
to them saying that that would be needed for those
who have large numbers of dogs?
I don't believe there's been any, um, further following up
of, um, communication with them.
But unfortunately, I, I didn't receive that email.
Obviously, I'm, I'm not a trainer or, yeah.
Yeah, It was a, I think it was a form
to ascertain your interest in, in going forward.
So that would be coll collecting the data
and then potentially going back to Okay.
I, I believe, but, okay.
No, that's fine. Thank you. If we Can,
Maureen has a question. Yeah.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for your submission.
I'm, I'm really interested to know about the, um, transition
of assets held by the industry across the country.
Not so much the individual breeders and trainers,
but the, um, lead body, maybe land buildings sort.
Right. So from what I understand is,
are you talking about race clubs or Yes.
Yes. So obviously the assets would be, would come to GRNZ
and then that is handed over to, to, um,
to the government. So
Sold to the government?
I don't believe so.
A lot of, a lot, obviously with a lot of the clubs they, um,
they lease the space from.
So for example, um, you know, edington, they have the,
basically the Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club,
they lease the space from the, um, the trotting club there.
Mm-hmm. So they wouldn't be selling the land,
but obviously the ongoing income from the rental
that they pay, um, you know,
would not go through to the Yeah. It would be lost.
I'm sorry. So just a quick stop on that.
So is that, um, your, your talk about in your, um,
written submission about a $60 million cost
of, of closure Yes.
Is, so is that what you're talking about, the cost
to those other, um, you know, the lease laws and
No, that, that's, that's primarily to get
through the rehoming effort.
So GRNZ estimated that it would be 40 thou, sorry,
$40 million, um, for the additional two
and a half years to rehome all the dogs at the, at the, um,
the point of closure.
Mac came back and estimated
that would actually be at a cost of around 60.
So, so that cost is
to re-home all the dogs. Okay. Post closure.
So, so that cost does not include the loss
of income to any other.
Do you have any idea about what
that might look like in terms of figure
No, no, I don't at this stage.
Uh, quick question from Andrew Ger.
Yeah, I just, just following on from Maureen, um,
if those assets, uh, to, I I take it that's,
you would expect that the sale of those assets
to be compensation back to the industry, I would assume.
I mean, ideally that, that would be the preference. Yes.
Yeah.
Thanks very much Stuart. We've come to time. Um,
Thank you. Uh,
uh, thank you very much.
Now we've got a submission from Allison Lee.
Morning Allison. Morning, welcome. And um, thank you.
You have 10 minutes. Time is yours.
Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name's Alison Lee, and I'm a trainer based in Canterbury.
Um, and I oppose, strongly oppose the bill.
I currently care for 13 greyhounds at home, six racing,
three on the great mates list, and four pets live at home.
I've been training for over 30 years.
Um, I also have a, a Greyhound with trained by Jason Dunn,
who I believe to be one of the best trainers in New Zealand
and someone I trust completely to give the highest level
of care to my boy Denver.
The, um, my, my Greyhound with Jason, um, injured himself
in the paddock at home, running around.
And it was an injury that I couldn't treat properly
and Jason rehabilitated, rehabilitated and for me
and returned him to racing at a top level.
Um, to understand this bill, you need to understand
that my daily reality,
my day in the kennel starts at six 30 in the morning,
emptying, feeding, feeding, breakfast, checking every dog,
especially those that raced the day before.
And then every dog goes in their paddock
for exercises and time out.
I return later for grooming another empty
and treating any minor injuries that they may have.
The main meal I feed at three 30,
followed by more paddock time.
My final empty is at nine o'clock at night when I put 'em
to bed with their biscuits.
We race and breed our own greyhounds.
We purchased a puppy from Perth, traveling ourselves
to meet her breeder and bring her home.
Molly, who races a little girl lost, was a prolific winner,
including a group one,
but her progeny of exceeded anything that we imagined.
Molly's offspring completely competed successfully against
the breast dogs in Australia.
Um, clone your own one.
Um, group two, Harris, Harrison, Dawson
and Cloner Clone Your own came home.
Connor returned to us to live out his retirement
where he passed away at nine years of age with cancer.
Above all, wonder of the group won.
Silver Chief, uh, group won Hobart 1000.
In doing so, he broke the track record.
He also, um, also got won the Group two cran ball cup.
He placed fourth in the Melbourne Cup, regarded to be one
of the world's greatest Greyhound racers,
and we continue to race his pro.
He today, not knowing whether our
livelihood still exists later this year,
creates constant anxiety, struggling to sleep, unable
to plan for future, worried about paying accounts.
I feel as you are not listening,
we care deeply about our dogs.
Greyhound welfare is my daily responsibility,
and I love my greyhounds dearly.
We were all painted as animal abusers,
and it damages Ralph's
and creates a sense of injustice
that further compounds the stress.
M**k have been invested, been instigated
to close Greyhound racing in New Zealand,
including providing support
for the industry participants affected by the closure.
But within six months,
the only thing I've had is an email from them asking
how many greyhounds we can look after
after the ban goes ahead.
No plan on how our hounds is to be re-homed,
and we need a clear, defined funded transition framework.
No financial support offered to me as an owner and trainer
after the 31st of July with no income to support my hounds
with ongoing expenses, including food,
vaccinations, and veterinary care.
The uncertainty is affecting our mental health match sign.
Identify significant risks to wellbeing participants arising
from the van, and it sure does have mental stress.
We have lifted it listed our life savings into
infrastructure, dogs, equipment
and compliance requirements, requirements set by GRNZ.
These assets cannot easily be repurposed
or sold no compensation for any semen we hold in storage.
No compensation for specialized infrastructure built
to meet the current standards required by Greyhound.
Racing. New Zealand will be worthless, no compensation
for the livelihoods and, and lives
and livelihoods of visible, which bill will destroy.
Oh, excuse me, if a Greyhound does not want to race,
its retired to great mates.
I only trust Greyhound racing New Zealand
to prove organizations great mates.
Knight Rave May Hounds and Kiwi Kiwi to home.
My dogs SPC unfortunately do not publish euthanize figures
as to the number of animals they destroy every year.
As this would affect their donations they receive.
And I have no doubt they would've euthanized a greyhound
that needed more time put into resources, put into it.
Every gr greyhound racing dog put into the Great Mates
program has a chance to find the perfect home,
even if it takes a year or more of training.
I have concerns that a dog at home by the SPCA
or any other rehoming group other than the Greyhound racing
New Zealand approved, will end up at a local pound
and become another statistic.
And Enclo, I
reflect on this, bill actually does,
it does not improve welfare.
It does not protect my greyhounds,
and it does not provide a safe funded
responsible transition.
The thousands of people, thousands of dogs,
and the people it affects.
I urge this committee to reject the proposal
proposed Greyhound roast and closure ban
Parliamentarians have made this decision on outdated
information without consultation
with Greyhound racing New Zealand,
or those of us who care for our dogs every day.
If Parliament is determined to end greyhound racing,
that is a moral responsibility to do so properly.
And that means a fully funded,
transparent re-homing framework,
meaningful financial support to o for support to owners
and trainers with fair compensation for dogs
and infrastructure efficient time for every dog
to be placed into the right home, not just any home.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um,
we have a question here from Joseph Mooney.
Thanks Alison for sharing that with us.
And, uh, I just wanna acknowledge that the clear passion
and love you have for your dogs,
and no, from having talked to farmers across the country,
they're very similar, but, uh, lack
of understanding sometimes about
how much people care about animals.
But a question, um, I have is, do, do you have any sort of
figures that you, that you,
if you're comfortable sharing them, what your current assets
are roughly, um,
and what loss
of income per annum you're, you're looking at potentially?
Currently I only have six dogs racing.
So my, I think off the top of my head,
my income last year was 35,000 from those dogs,
which over half of that went back into the dogs.
My costly weekly costs are about a thousand dollars a week.
Um, with the dogs I have, I have had up
to 50 dogs at one stage, but I'm now down to those.
And, and just in terms of your,
your overall assets related to the dogs and all.
Um, I would be looking at maybe 200,000 approximately,
maybe by the time you look at, um, all muzzles.
Nobody's got all muzzles.
Um, you've got your vans, you've got your, your,
your walking machines, you've got your straight tracks,
all things that can't be shifted your kennels.
Nobody wants a property with dirty kennels on.
So you, one last, just in your submission,
you said you one of the smaller, you one
of the smaller races in, in your career.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. I am. Yep.
Any further questions? No.
Well, thank you very much for your time today, Alison.
I really appreciate it.
Next we have Kelly McDermott.
Morning, Kelly. Good morning.
Welcome along to the primary production select committee.
Got 10 minutes allocated. Fantastic. Fire away.
Good morning. Uh, thank you guys so much for being here
and finally, uh, hearing us.
We appreciate it. My name is Kelly McDermott, uh,
and I've been a qualified veterinarian for about 15 years.
Uh, I currently own a veterinary practice,
which employs five staff.
Uh, I also produce blood product, which goes
to the New Zealand Companion Animal Blood Bank.
Uh, it's the only kiwi owned national supplier
of canine blood products, which save the lives of hundreds
of pets around New Zealand Every year.
My veterinary clinic caters to all companion animals
and along with the privately owned pets,
we provide veterinary care to our local s SPCAs.
Uh, we are one of the few clinics which participate in
community des sexing programs,
and we offer care to clients who would
otherwise be turned away to offset our lower income,
uh, SPCA work.
We also provide care to both retired
and racing greyhounds, uh, as well
as on track veterinary care.
Our Greyhound related work makes up approximately 75
to 80% of our income.
I'm frightened for myself.
I'm frightened for my staff
who are reliant on greyhound racing.
If this ban is to proceed as drafted, um, Excuse me,
there's wider implications to the span.
Um, our business for one, as well
as the veterinary wholesalers, the labs
and the accountant that I use, um, but also to the pets.
It could one day be your pet, um, who may not be able
to get blood that it might desperately need.
Um, as it stands, greyhound racing has some of the best,
if not the best welfare standards
of any pursuit involving animal uh, animals in New Zealand.
Um, it's well above the standards which are required
by the Animal Welfare Act of 1999, which is under enforced
as it is, um, when there is a breach noted
by either the Greyhound Racing New Zealand
or the Racing Integrity Board,
which happens very, very rarely.
I might add immediate action is taken.
One example of this is in the kennel requirements,
the Greyhound Racing New Zealand standards enforced
by the Racing Integrity Board state
that a kennel size must be at least three meters squared
with a minimum width of 1.2 meters.
Um, whereas the minimum required
by the Animal Welfare Act 1999.
So what SPCA and other, um, enforcements are gonna push, say
that one and a half square meters with a width of 800 mils
for the kennel space is enough.
Clearly, the dogs have significantly more room
with the Greyhound Racing Standards.
Um, during the kennel audits, one trainer had a kennel,
which was a whole millimeter too narrow,
and he was given an immediate, uh, order to cease using
that kennel until he could rectify its size.
That's how strict they're, um, previously I, uh,
too had a, uh, either a neutral
or even a slightly negative view on the racing industry.
Um, and most of that came from listening
to the activists on social media.
Um, not really telling the truth.
But after I became involved in the sport
and I saw the care that was involved in, in the dogs, um,
every single day, I started to change my opinion of it.
Um, my first involvement with the greyhounds was
with the Companion Animal Blood Bank about six years ago,
when the demand for the blood products exceeded
what my donor dogs were able to provide,
a prominent Greyhound trainer stepped in, allowed us to come
to their property and donate and,
and take blood donation from his own greyhounds.
Um, after this, I was then introduced
to the re harming group, such
as Knight Rave and Great Mates.
Uh, and eventually, eventually I was invited
to be an on track vet.
Um, and my view
of the racing industry has only improved with this.
Um, greyhounds are the most cared for animals
that I see in my daily work.
Um, their owners and the trainers have a special
bond with every dog.
Um, they call me night or day.
Uh, if there's any concerns, um,
this is far better care than the neglected
and abused dogs, which I see in the hands of, uh, SPCA
and hoo-ha and, and other places, um, dogs
that were left into the public hand.
Um, I've met many
of the trainers in the middle of the night.
I meet them on the weekends and occasionally on the side
of the road, halfway between their property
and mind to ensure that they
get the best care that they can.
Over the past five years,
I've seen the industry drastically improve
in their welfare of the dogs.
The euthanasia rate due
to racing injuries has been dramatically reduced.
And a very large proportion of the post-race vet checks
and stand downs are just precautionary,
as in there's no injuries found.
We give them a stand down to make sure
that they're gonna be okay and recover.
'cause some of us would be sore if we took a tumble.
Um, I certainly would. Uh, the trainers have cooperated
and they've made improvements at every kennel audit,
and they've poured their heart into
the wellbeings of their dogs.
Um, so my view on the legislation
as it's drafted is I do strongly oppose the ban.
Um, I don't believe that it's being driven
by validated welfare concerns.
Um, I would like
to see Greyhound racing continue under the strict guidance
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand rules, uh,
and enforced by the RIB, uh, as well as a continuation
of the kennel audits and the population control measures
that we already have in place.
Um, the shift to straight tracks
or one turn track would allow the best welfare
of the greyhounds to be had, as well as continuing
to reduce the serious injuries.
Um, however, if the ban is to proceed, uh,
I would ask the bill to be amended to continue
as a stage wind down, um, over the course of four
or five years would be great, um, that would allow processes
to be put in place for both dogs and the trainers.
Um, I also strongly suggest
that Greyhound racing New Zealand
and the re-homing groups continue to operate
to maintain the oversight of the re-homing frameworks, um,
which are leading the way in New Zealand welfare.
Uh, and the clubs should continue to act as the pillars
of the community that have come to love.
So in conclusion, I'm asking you guys the committee
to recommend changes
that are gonna actually provide good welfare for these dogs,
um, and the people who love them dearly. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Kelly, we have a question here from
Andrew Hova to start with.
Yep. Um, you mentioned about your involvement
with doing the blood products.
Yep. Um, so if there wasn't a greyhound industry in the
country, what, what would that mean for the ability
for blood products for other dogs?
Yeah, it's, it's a real big
concern to be completely honest.
You're gonna hear more about it, um, when the owner
of the blood bank speaks.
But the big concern is
how do we keep coming up with more blood?
Um, greyhounds are by and far the best donors.
They naturally have more red cells,
so more oxygen carrying capacity.
So their blood is mill for milk compared
to another breed the best.
So we could collect blood from other dogs,
but it's not as good.
If you're con comparing, uh, one mil
of blood from a hunter versus one mil from a greyhound,
you're gonna get far better return from those greyhounds.
Um, so without the greyhound industry, truthfully,
the blood bank will probably fold, um,
because we need to figure out either a new source
of greyhounds, um, whether that's importing from Australia,
breeding our own, um, or completely changed the model.
And truthfully, if you've wrestled a really fat Labrador
to try to get blood off of it, I'm not keen on
Great deal of experience wrestling fat Labrador.
Um, just, just wanna clarify in the second paragraph, you,
uh, towards the end you say, I can assure you
that the welfare of greyhounds is
of very little to no concern.
I take it that means you're,
that you don't have a concern around the wealth.
You believe the welfare is highly looked
after, not that you're not concerned about them.
Yeah. That you, that you feel like the welfare
is really well looked after.
I'm that correct. That is correct.
I'm in a very, very privileged position
and that I see these dogs at their homes.
Um, I see them on the track and I see them on their rehomed.
And, um, you know, if there was a concern
that I saw when I'm on one of the trainer's property,
I'd be the first one to go shouting to SPCA,
Hey, we've got an issue here.
I've sat in court before to, um, with SPCA
and MPI fighting against animal abuse and neglect cases.
I've not once seen anything that would warrant
that on the Greyhound properties.
And I've been to every single trainer in
essential district's property.
Thanks, Kelly. We now have a question for Maureen. Um,
Thank you. Um,
thank you very much, uh, Kelly
for your professional insight.
Um, if, if we were to look at the whole proposal,
could you hear it back
and explain to the committee what is the problem
that we are attempting to resolve?
Um, as in you wanna know what my,
my take on the ban itself? What is
The problem that this bill needs to address?
Um, well it depends on who you talk to.
I mean, publicly
or broad face, it would say the,
the unacceptable injury rates.
But I can argue that that's not, that's not true.
What, what is, what's an acceptable injury rate
and how are the greyhound racing injury rates unacceptable
when they're significantly lower than they
are in the equine codes?
Um, I'm assuming that's
what it's the ban is trying to address.
So you're not clear what the ban is?
Well, no, because the, the ban is set out to,
to abolish commercial greyhound racing.
So that's commercial greyhound racing.
You can still race your greyhounds, you can still
bet on greyhounds overseas.
So what protection is there
for the greyhounds if you ban commercial greyhound racing,
it just pushes everything underground means you still can
get greyhounds, pig hunters can get greyhounds,
run 'em all they want race them for a case
of beer or whatever.
Um, so I don't, I don't see
how the span is gonna improve the welfare of the dogs
Run dogs. Sorry.
Um, thank you very much. Thank you, uh, Kelly.
That is really, really insightful from, um,
a professional perspective. Thank
You very much. Um,
We have next, uh, we've got, uh, Karen Wick.
Hi. Can I just say my comfort zone
and I are in different time zones at the moment.
I'm very nervous. I don't do people, I don't do zoom calls,
I don't do speaking, so this is a big deal for me.
Sure. I would just like to show you
'cause we couldn't bring our own dogs.
This is one of my dogs
and he's meeting with his old trainer, Andy McCook,
pure love on that dog's face.
And that's the same when any dogs meet their trainers.
So my name is Karen Wicks.
I oppose the Greyhound Racing Band Bill.
Um, I've been involved
with greyhounds in New Zealand since April, 2013.
Started off fostering for greyhounds as pets adopted,
then became an area coordinator for them in Christchurch,
then became the South Island Regional coordinator.
Um, then Joe Hardy
and I decided that we would branch out on our own
and we formed Kiwi Kiwi Hounds.
I have also owned two racing dogs.
One did quite well. One retired after three races.
They're both sitting on my couch along
with two other adopted greyhounds.
So I've got four greyhounds earning no cake, just laing
around on my sofas.
So I don't agree with the band. I think that straight track.
So the way to go. Um,
and if the band hadn't been announced when it was just
before Christmas, then the Ash Burton straight track
would have gone ahead
and more data would've been able to be gathered
about the impact on the dogs on that racing.
If as I suspect, the ban will go ahead, then
what we need is a longer leading.
The welfare of greyhounds starts from birth
and it currently goes all the way through to death.
Whether it's unfortunately on a racetrack
or whether it is with an adopted family.
We look after our greyhounds, we care for them.
We support our families that adopt the greyhounds.
We had a family that're going to have to return the dog
because their financial situation has changed.
But we enabled them to keep that dog by paying
for their food bills and their vet bills
until they were in a better position.
Because if we'd taken the dog back, we would've had to pay
for the dog's food and
what have you in another foster family.
So it just made sense to keep that dog in that family.
I have been walking the dogs at the, um,
ran kennel on Sunday mornings
for the last eight years as a volunteer.
I work full time in a bookstore in North Canterbury.
So on one of my days off,
I spend walking the dogs as volunteer.
Kiwi Kiwi House is a volunteer based operation.
There's Joe and myself.
We've recently got a another person on board as, um,
a foster coordinator
and we've got a couple of foster homes and that's it.
So in our spare time we rehome the dogs.
It takes hours and hours and hours.
We have a form that people fill in online, then we have
to contact them.
We arrange a visit to their home to make them understand
or to make sure that they understand
what adopting a greyhound entails.
And it takes a long, long time.
And sometimes we've got a dog that's ready immediately.
Sometimes it can take a few months for the right dog to fit
that family, the people
that are against the ban.
We are looking at greyhound racing as it is now.
We are not going back and saying, oh,
but what about ha what happened 10 years ago?
What about all the bad things that happened 20 years ago?
Bad things happen, bad trainers have happened.
You get bad parents. Do we not let people have children
anymore just because there's a few bad parents?
You get bad police,
you get bad politicians. You do. Well,
Not in here, surely Not here.
No, not here. But you get bad in,
in every walk of life.
Weeding them out is, is important.
And I feel that Grey Ham racing in New Zealand
who have supported us are doing that.
And we've got a new young crowd of people that are coming up
to be trained is,
and it's just heartbreaking that Greyhounds will go.
The young people will go
and they'll join the big crowd of people
that are currently leaving New Zealand to go
to Australia and other places.
And I think it's really sad that we're
possibly gonna allow that.
And that's it.
That's all. Thanks,
Uh, very much. Karen,
do we have any questions?
I'm pretty clear. Look, I, so David, look, look,
I've just come in here and I'm, I'm what I'm aware
of the issues in the background to it.
I just, just, just acknowledge the fact that you, you know,
you, you've played a role in all parts of the industry
and caring for the dogs as well.
So thank you for coming up.
It's great. Thank you. Really appreciate it.
You should do this more often. Make you good editor.
Thank you. Very good. Thank you so much.
We'll see you next time. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, now we have, uh, Peter Hedrick.
Good afternoon, Peter. Good
Afternoon. Um,
welcome to the Primary Production Fleet Committee.
Thank you've got 10 minutes.
Thank you. Um, Far away.
Peter Hedrick, uh, for electric, uh, for Cion.
Um, I'm a grey trainer.
I have for the last, um, what, five years, six years now.
I was formally in the, uh, racehorse industry.
Um, I was there for 35, probably 36 years
and went to the greyhounds one day
and fell in love with them.
So I started to train greyhounds.
Um, there is a lot, a lot involved
that you'll probably never know what goes on
with training greyhounds.
It's, it's not just getting up in the morning
and feeding them and coming back later on.
You've gotta take care of them.
You've got to, I take 'em to the beach, give them a swim,
come back if there's an injury, we ultrasound, greyhounds.
If something's wrong with them, we take 'em to the vets.
Um, you feed them properly.
You need all the proper food.
All the, the whole kennels
has cost me an absolute fortune to, for the regulations
that GRNZ have put in.
And I'm just, yeah.
When I heard about the band, I was just blown away.
Absolutely blown away. Cannot believe
that this would go ahead.
And, um, yeah, it's like, um,
the impact on nudes, you know,
it's been like the younger generation in the greyhound
racing, they've been passed down from family to family.
Um, that's all they know. That's it. All boaters.
That's, you know, that's all they know. They love it.
They love the greyhounds. It's been families and families.
Um, where are they gonna find another job?
You know what I mean? If that's all they know.
Um, especially in this market now
where it's very tight foot, you know,
like tight labor market.
It's for the younger generations, it's very hard for them
to get into a new role, you know?
Um, and the impact on mental wellbeing.
Like, I dunno what I'm gonna do.
I've, I've got, I've got a, um, what 14 kennels there.
It's cost me fortune to get to build it.
And then all of a sudden
after all the dogs go, I've gotta re like, pull it all down.
You know, I've just, it's waste of, waste
of money, you know what I mean?
What am I gonna do? Um, paddocks, I've gotta
rechange all the paddocks around.
Um, so, uh, yeah,
I just, financial pressure.
Where is that gonna come from? What money?
You know, like, um,
I've got, I've got, um, like, it's just gonna be a,
a major, a major setback, you know?
And for my daughter who's going
through Howard College at the moment,
who absolutely loves the greyhounds, absolutely loves it.
We had our first litter last
and now it looks like they won't even make the track.
If, if they do, it'll only be for a couple of months.
That's cost thousands. You know what I mean?
Like, she's devastated my daughter. She's just broken.
And if you could see your face, you'd know she comes
with me every afternoon after school to do the dogs with me.
What, in a few years time. There will be nothing there.
Just, just ridiculous.
She's just, um,
it's just, yeah.
Like, just And what's the,
uh, what's it, uh, the last, the it um,
the closure decision.
It hasn't been given a proper thought at all.
It's not sustainable to close down an industry in 18 months
that employs over a thousand people
and generates 160 million to the economy.
$160 million.
And I can tell you right now, none of my dogs
or my babies, I call 'em, will never be going to SPCA.
Never. I'll wait
until the GONZ agencies are free.
And that could be how long.
So I've gotta look after these dogs for the next,
how many years before they get called up
to go into a home.
I've had two dogs go into a home, not long back.
And it's taken them, um, what
I had 'em at home for nearly six months.
Not racing, just sitting in my kennels, getting fed,
taking 'em to the beach, taking 'em
to the paddock, give them a run around.
So it's not gonna be an easy from, from end of July right
through, you gotta still gonna have the greyhounds there.
I've still gotta look after 'em.
I've still gotta take 'em to the beach every day.
Make sure they're fed in the morning.
I've been up since five 30 this morning. Jump on a plane.
'cause my owners, my owners
of the dogs turned up this morning to feed my dogs and look
after 'em while I come up here to this meeting.
But I jump on the plane this afternoon.
They do 'em this afternoon.
It's the only time I get off work is when,
when I'm away like this
or if I'm gonna go to a race meeting, I'm there 24 7.
I don't have holidays and you gotta take all this away.
And I love it, because that's what I do. That's my passion.
And you are gonna rip it all away from me.
No, no, I don't, just don't,
I just don't agree with that at all.
If anything, like step down,
like take four to five years or whatever,
or put straight track race again and give us a chance.
Build straight track, uh, straight tracks.
Let us show you that.
It is, it is safe
and sustainable to have straight tracks at New Zealand.
We can manage it. We have, we do it at wah.
I was there two days ago,
so Yeah, that's, I just, yeah, I just cannot believe
that this is going ahead.
I just, sorry. But yeah, it's just
possibly a fortune and I just, my babies are my babies.
You won't find anyone passionate than me, I'll tell you.
Uh, thanks very much Peter.
Um, really heartfelt submission.
Uh, Joseph Mooney has a question. Oh, thanks Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank, thanks Peter for that submission.
Um, could you just give us an, if you're comfortable, a bit
of a ballpark figure in what your asset, uh, in this
and what your loss of income per
annum, what is looking like?
Well, I think, well the pups,
I'm looking at like 40 for the pups, 40,000 for the pups,
and they're only 16 months old.
I might get, uh,
a couple of months of racing.
That's about it. Otherwise,
and they're, there's, I've only got four of them.
Um, but yeah, so, um, whatever you earn last year,
80, I think, or something like that.
So, yeah. And then you've got all the equipment.
I've got two ultrasound machines.
Um, you know, you've got your, your vehicles, your trailers,
um, the food that you buy, you know,
like I buy the kibble local exterior, but I keep local.
I keep it in the, in the community.
Like in our little village.
Um, I go to the normal butcher shop, um, cost me fortune
for the meat, but they get the best of everything.
So, yeah, I'd say about over a hundred
cost me 20 something just to, to do all the kennels had
to read 'cause they have to be a certain size.
I had to get the RIB to come out
and then, um, they checked it all out,
but the measurements and everything.
Um, so everything's gotta be done by standards.
Otherwise you can't, if I was a,
I was only one of my channels.
Were out a little bit. You have to do it this way.
So the standards are so high, it's not funny.
And I know the standards from the Greyhound racing
to the race, the horse racing industry, totally different.
Totally different, more regulated
and yes, do an absolute amazing job.
Thank you. Just question Damon. Yeah, sorry. Um, look,
Thank you for the submission.
Just one question. Given these issues have been around
for quite a while, why do you think the industry's not moved
more quickly to straight tracks?
Oh, it doesn't take five
minutes to build a straight track. You know what I
Mean? I appreciate that, but it's been, these
issues have
Been around for, but yeah, but you've gotta go,
you've gotta go out and source the land.
It's not an easy job to go out
and go, well, I'm just gonna take that block of land
and I'm gonna put a track on it.
So you've gotta go through all the council,
you've gotta get all those, all the, you know,
it just all the red tape as you wanna say
before all the hoops you've gotta jump through to get there.
It's not like you can't just go
and build a straight track here, there anyway.
You've gotta go through all this. It takes time.
And then, and then when they did get that straight track
where they got that block of land inside the, the track,
well, they moved, but then you've got weather, you know,
you can't just your weather permitting,
it's straight track racing.
That's what we need.
Right. We've come to the end of your time.
Thank you very much for
Thank you very Much. Your,
um, submission.
Next we've got, uh,
Markowski, I said that right.
Um, Roski, that's the word, um, uh,
to do a submission.
So welcome Mark, same afternoon. Thank you.
You've got 10 minutes. I think you know how this works.
So, uh, fire away.
Uh, yes, I have been here since, uh,
half state this morning and I've seen every submission
and I wanted to do that.
Yes, I'm Mark Roski.
Um, I have been involved in the industry for 43 years.
Uh, I got involved as a 14-year-old through one
of the nicest people I've ever met.
Pat Cagney, who lived in close to where I was.
And I visit his graveside every time I go to Kapo, left
that much of an impression on me, not only
because of the way that he treated humans,
but the way that he treated his animals.
His greyhounds were pristine.
They gleaned as the top trainer of the time,
said you could eat their, your dinner off their backs.
That's what attracted me to Greyhound racing.
I got involved for the love of the dog.
I sit here today and cannot believe that the parliament
of New Zealand can consider that people
who train greyhounds have anything to answer other than
for looking after their dog in the best possible manner.
I'm a broadcaster,
and I'm sorry to say that
as a broadcaster.
I don't know what's gonna happen in this next 10 minutes
because I wanted to come here today
and listen to all of the submissions that you could finally
actually hear from people who live
and deal with these greyhounds every day.
One month, tomorrow, I'll call my last Greyhound meeting.
I'll be made redundant as a direct result of this ban.
33 years I've worked
and watched just about every Greyhound race
that has occurred on every track.
I have met just about everybody in this industry.
I'm proud and happy to call 'em friends.
They are good New Zealanders.
How is it possible for the parliament of New Zealand
without any consultation?
No consultation at all, ban
and industry of any description,
and particularly one with the people are living
and breathing with the animals every day abiding
by the greatest regulations known to animal welfare
in this country and potentially the world.
I don't know. How is that possible?
How can there not be an inquiry? What is social license?
Who determines social license?
Society will ask society then most
of society don't even know greyhound racing happens.
But those who do may have an opinion
before they're asked for that opinion.
They should be informed, not just from one side.
And that is the only thing we've heard from one side,
vitriolic diatribe from people with an agenda.
That is all we've heard from.
And until today, none
of these people's stories have been told none.
How can that happen? Darren, when you spoke earlier,
and I know that some you weren't here
and he stole my thunder
and that he said he would not vote in this election.
I have no one left to vote for in New Zealand.
I have a 14-year-old and a 10-year-old,
and I don't want to set them that example.
But what can I do when my faith
in parliament and what I thought New Zealand was, is damaged
to this extent whereby somebody can come in
virtually on a whim because nothing stacks up.
You've heard it today.
You've heard from people who deal with these greyhounds,
these beautiful dogs every single day, haven't been talked
to, haven't been spoken to.
I'm so pleased to have heard from the
young people like Chloe Watson.
Today. There's more coming with Katie Wiley people.
She was a trained teacher. She
wants to work with Greyhounds.
She's an animal abuser. No, she's the opposite of that.
You're about to put these people of the scrappy of 57.
I've had my time, that's fine. But not these young people.
I will back these young people to the health.
Now there's a board award
every month awarded for Greyhound racing New Zealand.
I implore you to go on the website
and to look back through the last three years
of those young under 30 year olds
who have been awarded this.
Now two of them are in Australia.
Two of our very best young people in their twenties,
Ella Cole and Riley Evans are now in Australia
because of this.
Do I call it a decision? What is it?
So where is this inquiry? Where is the consultation?
Where do we get our opportunity?
The media farcical vi like diatribe
through stuff completely unchecked.
And they won't take any of our stuff.
They won't take any counter argument.
How is New Zealand operating this way?
TV three persecuted a family of five for three
and a half years over some grainy photographs
that the SPCA claimed proved that they were live baiting.
Well, I was part of the PCA's evidence, a text that I sent
to the trainer that could be explained in a nanosecond,
which I did to a private investigator.
Were any charges ever proven? No, they weren't even laid.
TB three harbored on about this for three years.
And not one charge was even heard
because in the end the police said, go away to the SPCA.
And those people are now racing.
Greyhounds again, are back on the track again.
And they are the leading trainers in the country by volume.
But if you go and visit their place,
you will be amazed at what you see.
You will want to park up
and live in a kennel there later today.
And I won't be staying for the last, I will not be staying
for the last submission.
It is a coalition for the protection of greyhounds,
the protection of greyhounds greyhound racing.
As you've heard today,
the Greyhound breed will cease to exist.
They are bred to race. That is what they do.
That is what they love. I have a five-year-old in my house.
We celebrated her fifth birthday the other day.
She should be racing now. But she's been desexed.
She's in pristine condition.
She was trained by four different trainers,
including Peter Hedrick.
She was seen by Vet Kelly McDermott,
and she is a magnificent animal, and she has raced
and she has loved it, and she still wants to do it.
The protection of Greyhound.
This bill takes all the protection away
from the Greyhound breed.
They should be called the Coalition for the Extinction
of Greyhounds, because that, that is the outcome of
what is going to happen if this bill goes through.
And for the people, the good people could New Zealand
to be treated with the utter disdain
that they have been treated by the minister
is an utter disgrace.
Thank you.
Thanks very much, mark. Um, we have a question
From Ingrid.
Yeah. Just wanting to, um, acknowledge the, the, um, level
of concern and passion that you have.
And we've certainly heard that today.
I'm interested in the fact
that under our government there were a number
of reports done and we took the time
to consider this really seriously and in fact made.
And so this has been going on for a number of years
and there has been an opportunity for straight tracking
and also for the peak body, Greyhound racing New Zealand,
to educate the public in the ways
that you have been suggesting.
Do you have some level of concern
or anger, uh, given that, given what you've said today,
that that perhaps you are directing it at parliamentarians
when there has been a number of years for this to change.
And we've come to this point
because there is a perception
that things haven't changed adequately.
There's a perception, but nobody has been prepared
to listen to the other side.
So that perception exists.
I take responsibility as a broadcaster,
um, that I haven't been able to influence that perception,
but actually it's upon Parliament now
to actually think about this properly.
Now, in terms of Greyhound racing New Zealand, well,
the first two reports, as I understand it, we commissioned
not Parliament, we did.
And the 2021 Robertson report.
Well, we've heard about some
of the inaccuracies in that today.
We've also heard that as part of that,
there was to be a full inquiry.
Where is that inquiry?
Why are we here six months from the closure of an industry
with no full inquiry?
That was demanded in that report, A report, which
as I say we've pointed out today, has many.
In fact, sometimes some of the information is just wrong.
It's plain wrong.
Now, in terms of the straight track, as Peter Hedrick says,
they don't come overnight and Greyhound racing New Zealand,
were looking to build one and Ash Burton.
But how could they, the ex was hanging over their head.
You're not gonna spend millions
of dollars on a straight track
with an ax hanging over their head.
That's just not going to happen.
And so consequently, we find where we're at now,
and my contention is,
nevermind extending the length of time.
Although that would be helpful to some of my colleagues.
My contention is
that the government should actually invest in greyhound
racing, should invest in strike tracks.
It is a legitimate, legitimate industry.
It actually requires support and funding
and would actually return a better
dividend to the government.
Thanks very much, mark.
I really appreciated your submission.
Thanks for your time. Thank you.
Now, um, we've got, uh,
John Roberts from the Auckland Greyhound Racing Club.
Uh, good afternoon everyone,
and thanks for the opportunity to present.
Uh, as, uh, my colleagues have, uh, described this
as the one and only chance that we will get to present,
which, uh, I find very disturbing.
Um, I will be talking mainly
to my club submission rather than my personal submission.
But just before I start, could I just draw your attention
to the fact that these people here, not sinners,
you've heard the passion, the glory that they've got
in their greyhounds
and indeed themselves, their personal lives,
they are not sinners.
What a disgrace for the minister to call our people sinners.
He will never be forgiven.
I'm a very, very proud New Zealander.
I've been on Earth 70 years.
I voted at every election that I have the power to.
I won't vote this year along with these other people.
And I find that greatly disturbing.
It really, really upsets me. I am not a sinner.
They are not sinners. So I want to clarify that first.
Um, now I'd like
to know why there hasn't been any attempt from the minister
or the minister's office after 15 attempts from N-Z-G-R-A
or Greyhound Racing New Zealand,
should I call it 15 attempts to communicate with him
and not one reciprocated?
That is unbelievable.
If your health minister contacted was failing
to contact his health boards 15 times in a year,
I think our prime Minister would be beside himself.
Mr. Peters has got three codes within this
racing organization.
There's three codes. He has directly ignored us.
He has failed to update himself on welfare,
standard injury statistics that I'm immensely proud of,
immensely proud of.
I'm the chairman of a club that probably had some
of the worst injury statistics on the,
in, in, in the country.
But because Greyhound racing New Zealand now centralized
the, the, uh, employment of track curators,
our figures have catapulted down to most acceptable levels.
I'm immensely proud of that. Immensely proud of it.
The stuff that has happened, like water content
to certain readings, diagnostic materials been used
to read the race day track readings
and whatnot, that had just blown me away.
And, and, and how they have alleviated a major problem
for us, but no consideration has been given of that.
It, it's extremely frustrating from a admin
administrative's point of view.
I've been in Greyhound racing since 1996.
My first ever Greyhound at its first ever
start, won a group one race.
So it, it sucked me in a few lot.
And I'm proud to say that I've loved those dogs.
I've had them at home. I've, uh, had many pets at home
for the first 15 years of my 30 year involvement.
I was, uh, uh, an owner and then a handler.
And then when I retired, I decided to give back
to the industry and the, uh, the dogs that I love
and I give freely of my time.
I take not a cent.
I'm very proud to do the job, cater for the dogs,
look after my public, look after the staff.
It's a passion. I admit it's a passion,
but I'm proud to do that.
Now I wanna talk to you about welfare in particular.
Greyhound racing New Zealand pays
$17 million a year out in stakes.
$17 million, 8.3
or some say $8.5 million is spent in
welfare of these dogs.
That's a phenomenal figure. It is a phenomenal figure.
I believe the thoroughbred's about 1% of stakes,
maybe 2% in Australia,
but $8 million spent on welfare as opposed
to $17 million on stakes.
That must show you how much we care for these animals
and protect them and look after them.
It's, it's, it's an amazing figure
on race days if there is a, a serious injury.
Greyhound racing New Zealand fought the vet bull
for those dogs to be repaired and made into pets.
You know, they're immediately transport to transported
to a top quality veterinary clear clinics repaired,
put into rehabilitation and adopted out.
They're not put down like the thoroughbreds.
I can tell you that I've witnessed that day in payout.
They are taken care of.
Fortunately, because of the, well, the,
the track preparation,
our injury statistics have dropped alarmingly,
but no credit has been given to us for that.
That is extremely frustrating to have.
I I, I just can't understand why
the minister will not look at updated data
and take it into account.
We deserve that. We deserve to be considered.
I wanna move on to the club side of things.
The Auckland Greyhound Racing Club's been going
for over 30 years at the Manakau Stadium.
Our early members strove
and built a magnificent grandstand facility
with kennels underneath it.
And it's a multi-purpose grandstand.
It is a commercial catering kitchen that seats 260 people.
We have a commercial caterer that caters for our race days,
uh, holds our liquor licenses
and has a niche place in the South Auckland market providing
hospitality for weddings and engagements.
21st. You all know
what South Orland's like it is a niche place.
He has that niche place in the market.
That man's business is gone.
He's been through COVID, he's been through hell.
He's a hell of a good guy. He's a hell of a good caterer.
That man's gone, you know, his business is taken from him,
from no fault of his own.
I have staff that work for me.
I have two elder, well,
I'm not gonna call 'em older because they're younger than me.
They're plus 60.
They both have seriously ill partners.
They're more than seriously ill. They're incapacitated.
I can provide them employment up to 20 hours a week.
Use their work ethics, use their trade history
at a time that suits them.
They want to come on on a Tuesday morning. That's great.
If they wanna come in on a Thursday afternoon, that's great.
It doesn't worry me just as long as the work's done.
They're wonderful people. What are these gentlemen gonna do?
It's not so much the financial impact for either of them.
They need a break away from the care and loving.
They have to give their partners.
I can give them that been taken away.
Why should they suffer? I look at my office lady,
she's 50 years plus, had been out
of the off workforce for many years.
Terribly nervous when we interviewed her,
but was into dog agility.
I thought that lady can make this job.
Knows nothing about racing,
never will know nothing know about racing,
but she is an intricate part of our operation.
She's loved, she's respected,
and she's bloody good at what she does.
Where's that poor soul gonna get another job.
A lovely lady like that. It breaks my heart.
I look at my colleagues
and trainers, please don't be offended.
What I'm gonna say. The trainers are going
to be out of a job.
There's 1,054 people employed within the industry.
Well, I can tell you that most
of those people are wired differently from you and me.
And most people, they can't work nine to five.
They love their animals.
They'll work all odd days, all at odd weeks.
They'll work their hearts out with those animals.
But they can't go to a job at nine to five.
They're not wired that way.
This bill ruins their lives, not only their incomes,
their livelihoods, their asset base, their families,
it ruins their lives.
They're not wired like you and I, they're different.
And I don't mean that discourteous, same as racing people,
thoroughbred people, harness people.
They're all the same. They're wired differently to us.
All right, so I wanna stress that point.
I wanna also stress how proud our,
our club at Auckland have been
to support Greyhound racing New Zealand in their endeavors
to improve racing safety field sizes.
Nobody's touched on that today.
They've been reduced in sprint races, which take about 80%
of our races down to fields of seven with no box one.
There is no doubt, especially on the circle tracks,
that this has improved the racing safety
and the safety of the racing dog.
It's a huge improve. No account has been taken of that. Why?
Why won't somebody listen to the fact
that we have made efforts to improve?
We've gone out of our way.
We've spent thousands upon thousands of dollars.
I'm delighted to hear
my colleagues speak about the S-B-C-S-B-C-A
and their inability to rehome our dogs.
I have nothing against the SBCA.
They have their plates full. They cannot handle our dogs.
Our dogs are different breed.
The Great mates program supported
by Greyhound racing New Zealand fully is
where those dogs need to be rehomed.
If indeed they have to be rehomed nearly $700, well,
let's say it's 700, it's only three short adopted this year,
but they go round and check every home.
It's not here take a greyhound.
The greyhound is matched to a particular individual.
If a greyhound is a little nervous around children, it's put
with a single or a couple.
Right? It, there is a considerable amount of research
and data that's put into that.
IIII, I truly am staggered
that the SPCA could even think
that they could rehome our dogs.
They're our dogs, and we should be taking responsibility
of rehoming them ourselves.
And we are very, very willing to do that.
The hypocrisy at bringing in 46,000 races from Australia
for New Zealand public to bet on is well,
it's just unbelievable.
I'm a punter from way back and I'm, I, I admit it.
I will not bet on a dog race ever again
after the 31st of July.
And my betting on horse racing will drop down.
And believe me, it will,
because I'm a very strong will person. It will happen.
So, sorry John, I'm gonna have to interrupt you there,
but you're well over time.
Oh, sorry. Might be. But, um, I really appreciate, um,
your submission as to the rest of the committee
and we'll be taken into consideration.
Thank you very much. Thank
You.
We now have Pete
Fenimore Afternoon.
Pete, how are you? Good afternoon. Uh, very good. Thank you.
And, uh, thank you for this opportunity. Way you go.
Yes. Uh, my name's Peter Finmore.
I have been involved in the greyhound racing industry
for 49 years,
and I strongly oppose the closure
of Greyhound racing New Zealand.
I first became involved in 1976, which was in those days
where it was sweepstake racing that was non tote.
It was for the enjoyment.
I became hooked on the code
and I got my first Greyhound in 1980 as a pup.
I owned them, trained him, raced him, retired 'em.
I bought 'em today, medic
walked in 1980.
I still got him. I still got his, I still got his ashes.
He lived the rest of his natural life for my family.
As a pet, I still race greyhounds today.
For the last 30 years I've been involved in Greyhound media,
and that's an area I'll touch on again shortly.
The Greyhound has always been a heavily regulated animal.
Welfare has always been to the forefront.
It is distressing to constantly get hammered
with the misinformation distributed about Greyhound racing,
fabrication of lies.
They say that greyhounds are freely, uh, are euthanized
totally incorrect.
Before, when this ban was announced in, in Parliament rush
through a book, a belt
or a legislation, making it illegal to ize the Greyhound.
If the research had been done properly,
they would've realize that those rules
have been in Greyhound racing for years.
The penalties are severe up to lifetime bands.
They say that greyhounds are forced to race.
If you watch a greyhound feel preyed into
to the starting tracks, you'll see greyhounds
bounding on the end of their league towing,
dragging their handlers to the boxes they wanna race.
They say the grounds are mistreated and abused.
Can I provide you with an analogy?
What an owner driver of a contractor truck
neglect, maintenance, and upkeep of that truck.
Of course he wouldn't. That's his income.
Now, the same scenario applies with the Greyhound trainer.
What a Greyhound trainer abuse,
neglect a greyhound.
Of course they're not. They'll rely for their income.
I'm gonna ask a question of you,
the select committee members
and ask, have any of you, for the sake of a balance opinion,
taken the time to go to Greyhound race meeting?
Excellent, excellent.
Um, the extensive welfare checks,
the greyhounds are subject subjected to every Greyhound.
At every Greyhound meeting is extensive.
The welfare checks supervised by a vet.
Again, I'd like
to see select committee members take the opportunity to go
and visit a greyhound kennel.
I can assure you, you'll be overwhelmed by the love,
care, and attention that all the greyhounds receive.
I urge you to at least attend a Greyhound meeting
and watch the pre-race checks and visit a Greyhound kennel.
And I've got no doubt GRNZ can organize that.
The timeframe, the for the proposed, uh,
phasing out greyhounds,
the way the bill is drafted at the moment,
will create massive welfare issues.
As, as you've heard throughout today
or this morning, in excess
of 1500 greyhounds will be needing homes.
That's come one August 26th. Unrealistic.
It's impossible. It's interesting
to note the proposed ban
or greyhound racing in Tasmania,
which has since been delayed.
However, at the time of the announcement they were given
until 2029 White to allow Greyhounds
who were br in good faith to have a racing career.
And, and the people involved with them, the owners,
the trainers under our current, uh, uh,
bell Greyhounds will have an bridge racing courier.
Many will will not have a recent career whatsoever
if closures occur.
Please look at the Tasmanian timeline
support training.
Roundhouse is a seven day a week, 52 week
a year commitment.
Trainers do not have holidays.
They don't have, they don't get sick pay.
They have no days in the loop. It's a lifestyle choice.
They require handling at least three times daily,
and there's no shortcuts.
Infrastructure costs have spiraled since the introduction
of new infrastructure requirements, which
has occurred openly over the last five or so years.
Trainers have freely adapted to the changes,
spending considerable amounts of money to bring up, again,
as what you've already heard, the standard, uh,
NEL requirements, for example, for
what come August the first many rent the properties,
they are required to return their properties
to the regional state.
Can you imagine the harm, the emotion involved,
the heartbreak to deconstruct their investments?
As I indicated earlier, I've, I, it's been an honor
and a privilege for, for me to be, to be involved in, uh,
uh, media side of greyhound racing, which I have
for the last 30 years.
I've conducted thousands of interviews.
Those interviews since the band was announced,
went from an average of about five minutes.
They're now 15, 20 minutes.
My favorite interviews has been with the youth
for young ones when interviewing 'em about their career
ambitions, their excitement, their enthusiasm, the ambitions
that they have has been totally infectious today that is
replaced with despair, anxiety, calling.
You talk about greyhound wealthy,
but they, the human welfare communication, well,
again, as it's already been mentioned
today, it doesn't exist.
Minister Peters refuses to engage with JRNZ
publicly states that Greyhound people are sinners.
I resent that. So do a lot
of my co all of my colleagues do.
I've been these people to Greyhound racing from,
there are people from the thorough code vintages,
they're called sinners.
Come on. And I What about the force, uh,
closure of Greyhound racing New Zealand
and the 48, uh, uh, clubs, the seizure
of assets from lawful incorporated societies.
And I thought New Zealand's a democratic country.
I, like others have already mentioned, I may Senator one.
I've voted at every election.
I have no intention to vote in this election.
Thank you very much for your time.
I urge you the select committee members to recommend
that Greyhound racing New Zealand is
and remains an acceptable form of racing.
Thank you. Thanks Pete.
Um, appreciate your, uh, submission.
First have a question from Maureen. Thank you.
Then, uh, Cameron and then Damien, if we have time.
Um, one of the things I haven't heard you today is
what kind of peer supervision goes on within the industry.
So, for instance, if you were at a track
and saw another owner trainer, um, mis mistreating
or doing something, you know, that they shouldn't be doing,
what kind of self-monitoring goes on within
the, within the sector?
Okay. I have never actually seen any,
um, mistreatment of the gray owner.
That's as much at, at a race meeting.
However, I am aware of an incident that happened.
The Race integrity Board came down very heavily.
That person was suspended for a considerable period of time.
And there had been other
things around that you, that issue.
Again, heavy penalties.
But internally you would say that the,
the trainers generally keep an eye on each other.
Oh, absolutely. Yes.
You know, some
of the bigger cans are reliant on other trainers
to help them on their rest day activities.
And people freely give their times.
You've got 20 seconds, Pete, you, you, you put it, um,
in a way deconstruct their investments, like
how people are actually gonna have
to physically pull down these structures.
But yes, and it is a crash question to ask,
but how, like, what is the compensation
that do you think would go anywhere near making people whole
for the assets that they are deconstructing in terms
of financial terms?
Everybody is different, but how about the industry?
Well, the cost of the industry would be horrendous from
that there's been no compensation indicated or, or manship.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. To me it's more about the
welfare Yep.
Of people having to do something like that. Yeah.
From building up in good faith
and suddenly overnight it's taken away from them.
That's, that's a chilling part. Thanks, Peter.
I'm gonna have to interrupt you there well past time
and we're gonna be running late at the other end.
So thank you very much. I really appreciate. No, thank you.
More insights into the industry.
Uh, next we have Karen fee via Zoom.
Hi, can you hear me? Good Afternoon, Karen.
How are you? Uh, I take it you've been watching proceedings.
I've just been watching a little bit.
I'm a full term nurse, so I haven't had much time.
Okay. So you've been allocated 10 minutes
to make your submission.
If you want, um, questions to be asked.
Uh, you, uh, asked that you bear that in mind
as you make the presentation.
Yeah. So far away.
Cool. So yeah, my name's Karen Fee. I'm from Canterbury.
Um, my background is all my life. I've had dogs.
I've done competition, obedience and agility.
I've bred and showed dogs for 40 years.
Um, school holidays were spent volunteering at vet clinics,
seeing what, what the realities of, um,
welfare of animals are.
And I've seen some very ugly things.
Um, I first became involved with greyhounds six years ago,
um, thought maybe I would be able to foster dogs.
And my very first, um, contact was finding out
that a patient of mine was a Greyhound trainer
and asking if I could go to the kennels
and see how these dogs lived.
So what did we need to do when fostering dogs
to bring them into being pets?
Completely neutral about Greyhound racing.
I never really thought about it.
Um, the guy had 20 minutes warning that I was coming.
And I went out there and I saw the dogs in their home.
And I always used to say, I'm coming back
as a cat one day, change my tune.
If I can ever come back as my choice, I'd come back
as a racing greyhound.
Their lives are astonishing. The care is unbelievable.
And I could not put a finger on anything poor about
that since that time.
So I now own two register,
two retired racing greyhounds of my own.
Um, I am a full-time nurse, as I said,
but I also foster for night Rae Greyhounds.
I'm fostered over 50 dogs. These are cat trainable dogs.
Um, I do home checks of people that are looking at, um,
getting a greyhound.
I do behavioral work with people that have got difficulty
with some aspects of the dogs.
Um, I'm always there for the team.
And so I am quite fully involved in this.
Um, I've been to seeing many, many trainers
and their places, and I could not put a finger on anything.
I would change about how these dogs are looked after.
They have fabulous welfare,
and these people love their dogs.
They put so much time.
This is not just a living, this is a life
that these people live.
Um, I challenge you with one thing, the,
the welfare hypocrisy.
So, um, greyhounds racing New Zealand became transparent.
Every injury, a scrape of fit of skin, um, going
through a gateway, going to the races, was put down
as an injury to try and show exactly
that there was nothing being hidden.
Um, and it seems to have backfired
that it was all sort of turned against them.
But what audits are in place, for instance, for the welfare
of guide dogs, police dogs, pig dogs,
indeed pet dogs, there is none.
How can you close down an industry
that has everything open when you have not
examined all the other things?
It is a total hypocrisy.
Um, the, the fact that a, a set
of welfare standards were set, you know, these things have
to be, um, improved and those things have been far exceeded.
And then suddenly what we're, we're putting up a ban.
Now, this was not addressing clearly
or looking at the reality of the changes that were made in
that time to the welfare of the dogs.
Um, so there was an indication that in fact,
it was just a hollow, a hollow aim.
Um, so one of the things that's really important to know is
that hope is, is a basic human need.
So to suddenly have everything taken away
that these people have been working so hard to improve
and improve on, and it was just ripped from them.
Um, so it is a life, it's multi-generational.
There are generations. This is all they've done,
and they are good at it.
These people are superb animal people,
and they're superb people.
And I'm very proud to say that I have now many friends
as trainers in the industry.
They are wonderful people.
Um, so the the analogy I would put is that I'm a nurse.
Imagine if I was suddenly told, well,
we're gonna stop nursing, but you've still gotta look
after your patients because they have welfare.
So we won't pay you to do your nursing anymore.
You have to find another way
to make a living on your own time.
You have to train that.
You have to find a way to make a living
and to keep yourself earning during that time.
But you also still have to look
after your patients in your own time
to the best of their welfare.
It's an impossibility that you have set.
Um, I totally ban, oppose the ban.
But if you're going to bring the ban about, you need
to bring in time and strategies
to give these people a chance
to completely change their lives.
They are having everything ripped from under them.
Um, they're being told that everything they do is,
is worthless.
Um, I have had a dog myself running across a lawn,
just running flat lawn.
No other dogs put its head up to look at something,
put its foot down, catastrophic fracture up the upper
arm into the shoulder.
I'm not talking about a greyhound.
I'm talking about a Shetland sheep dog. Was it racing? No.
Was it injured? Yes. Was it catastrophic? Yes.
Was it because it was a racing greyhound?
No, it was an accident.
We see them, I'm a nurse, we see them in people.
We don't say, you can't go to school anymore.
People get hurt there. It's, it's, it doesn't make sense.
Um, I totally believe that the ban should be overturned.
Um, these dogs, if they're being, um, pushed through,
for instance, SPCA saying that they're going to, to, um,
take the dogs, these are sighthounds
and sighthounds are quite sensitive,
and they are going from living in one particular setting
to living in a different, different way of life.
And I strongly believe that fostering is really important so
that we teach the dogs the changes
that they're going to live with.
Um, they make superb pets.
And one of the things, the way they're raised is
that they're raise as a litter together.
Those dogs run together for months and months.
They learn to read each other's body language.
And what this brings about is a dog
that is incredible for therapy.
They can read each other's language.
They don't want this as prime predators.
They don't want there to be a fight.
If there's a fight, there will be deaths.
I have two people in my life who are not my family by blood,
um, who have been suicidal, who have
come out of themselves because of one of my dogs.
Literally, I had one sitting curled up in the fetal
possession, and my dog came
and put his forehead against this child's forehead
for over an hour until she was able to reach out to him.
And she says, and I quote, please, if anything happens
and he has to be put down, he saved my life.
He means so much to me. Don't take the dogs away.
If the band goes ahead, there will be suicides, not,
there might be suicides, not be
that there's some mental health issues within the industry.
Some of these people will suicide. I'm a nurse.
I work in primary care. I see the mental health realities
out there, and there will be suicides.
And this will be on you guys. I'm sorry. It will.
These people put everything into these dogs
and you are ripping every ounce of hope from them.
And, and we live in a world where we're trying
to do conservation to, to uphold, um,
map species and things.
We have got a very ancient, pure breed of dog
that will die out because this thing across the entire
world, it's tragic.
They are fabulous dogs.
Um, if you must go ahead with this ludicrous ban,
you must at least extend it by two to three years
to give these people some hope and give the dog some hope.
But I, but I strongly recommend that you do not ban this.
It's ludicrous. You aren't banning other things
which do create harm.
And in fact, all the evidence is there
that this has been addressed by the people.
Um, and they continue to try
to improve everything within it.
Thank you very much, Karen.
Uh, did you have a question, Damien, or do I
It was related, um, to the other one,
but may, maybe you could.
Um, no, I know. It's all right. It's not,
Uh, cam. Karen, thank
you very much.
Um, you, you brought up a topic, uh,
well brought up many harsh, hard topics to hear,
but one of them was about the reporting being used
against the Greyhound industry.
Can you talk a bit more about
how you feel about that and what,
Okay, so, so greyhounds racing in New Zealand,
when they had these, um, uh, policy support
or the, the, the aims put in place to try
and show that, that the welfare was improving thought.
Right? We, you know, they just recorded everything, every,
every injury, every if a to down was cut too short.
I, I'm sorry, Kerry, if I may, I just,
just in the interest of time, I'm asking, uh, more about
how, how is that, you know, that sort
of trust being broken in a way.
Like how has that impacted on people in the industry?
You have a trust. I'm saying if we, if we could, if we,
we've measured as adequate
and good across every measure,
the racing industry board has, um, we will be left alone.
Like people will, like how has it impacted on people,
you know, that that hasn't been the case?
Well, so I mean, it's a totally pulling away of hope
and of care and, and actually being told,
basically they were told they were sinners.
And, and yet everything has shown that,
that everything's improved.
And it was also, the injuries were quoted as being
the full injuries rather than just the major injuries
where some of those things were simply a toenail too short
in the interest of trying to do everything right
and show what was happening,
it was turned back against them.
Thank you. Yeah,
Thanks, uh, very much Karen.
We've come to time, but, uh, I can, uh, assure you,
we don't see you as sinners, so,
uh, be that in mind.
Uh, so we're gonna move on now to Daniel Roberts.
Good afternoon, Daniel. Welcome to the committee.
Um, I think you know the drill.
Senior van, I've been sitting down there for a while,
so, uh, far away. You've got 10
Minutes. Thanks, Mr. Chair
and committee. Uh, my name's Sam Roberts.
I'm from Cannery and I'm a Greyhound trainer,
and I strongly opposed this bill.
Uh, August 1st, 2017, I lined up my first race dog.
He was a winner that day. One from one
super bad was his race name, ter was his pet name.
Uh, while it wasn't his his first win,
it was a very special moment for me
as I was there when he was born and helped to rear raise
and break him in to become a race dog with my sister.
In the grand scheme of things, he wasn't a champion,
but he was a champion to me,
and he did win his fair share of races.
He retired on the 21st of November, 2018, a very healthy,
happy, and sound greyhound.
Not long after that, he was sent on his next
journey of becoming a pet.
And this was a very sad day
as we'd played such vital roles in each other's lives.
And him going out the gate
that day wasn't a wipe your hands moment,
forget about him type situation.
Um, unfortunately through no fault of his own,
and due to some very, very unfortunate
and sad circumstances, two of his homes fell through
and he was returned twice.
Uh, my partner at the time, Katie Wiley,
who you heard from earlier today,
and I decided that it may have been in his best interest
to come back to us for the time being
and live on my couch while we worked closely
with the Rehoming agencies to find a perfect
and final fit for him, so that he wouldn't have to endure
being moved all the time in another life.
I probably would've kept them myself.
But we were living in a tiny home with two
to three Greyhound pets already.
And some things just aren't feasible, unfortunately.
But I think this story highlights the dedication
and devotion for these dogs and their welfare
and wellbeing, even
after they've gone out our gate for the last time.
They, uh, their care is paramount
even when they've finished racing with us.
Which, uh, brings me to my next concern, which I think
is very important.
Um, these rehoming agencies that we do work very close with
to ensure that these dogs go
to find their best possible and suitable homes.
Uh, these rehoming agencies do a fantastic job,
and there was a good few of 'em around.
Uh, one of my concerns is that where is the funding
gonna come from for these rehoming agencies once
Grandey racing New Zealand ceases on the 31st of July.
And that's, that's a very scary thought.
My next concern, which I think is a major,
is the participant's mental health and wellbeing.
Since December 24, we've all been staring down the barrel
of a loaded gun waiting for someone to pull the trigger.
And can you imagine waking up every day to go
and do the job you love and work with the animals you love?
When in the back of the mind,
all you can think about is the fact
that one day you're gonna wake up
and it's all gonna be gone.
There's a massively heavy burden to bear
and it will be taking its toll hugely on everyone.
No one is immune. There has been no regard
for the participants of the industry.
The only mention we have received is to be called sinners
by our very own racing minister
and have a government law pass very quickly,
which made us out to look like criminals.
I was born into this industry.
I have lived, breathed, bled,
and loved it every day for 27 years with my family.
We all have goals in life and in our careers.
Mine are intertwined.
And while I have achieved many great things this far,
I have not yet climbed my Everest.
And now I'm facing the very real possibility
that I'll never get that chance.
Imagine carrying that with you for the rest of your life.
I have no idea
what the future holds to me.
I've invested a lot of money
and time into the Greyhound industry.
Money I'll never get back on investments
and assets that are now worthless.
I love New Zealand and I'm a very homebody,
but I cannot see a future
for me in New Zealand past the
31st of July should this bill pass.
The thought of this keeps me awake at night
and scares the crap outta me.
Our worry for our participants, the stress, anxiety,
and depression grows on their faces every week.
It is clearly noticeable when you see these people
week in, week out.
Our worry for our dogs
and the biggest worry of all is what will happen
to our beloved greyhound breed
of racing is deceased in New Zealand.
Thanks very much, Daniel.
I thought that was very articulate. Very and uh, very good.
Uh, uh, Damien first
'cause I've been holding him on for two.
Look, thank you very much. I mean, you, your,
your life is working with racing
and is one of the issues around, um, you know,
the willingness or the enthusiasm of dogs
or forces indeed to race.
I have experience with horses.
I know they like to race one another.
Um, is is that true for dogs or for greyhounds?
Yeah, definitely. Yeah, they don't all want
to go out there and be race dogs, it's a fact.
And those ones just find the couch a little
bit sooner than the other ones.
But, but generally if you line them up side by side,
they're quite keen to to race one another.
Uh, some of 'em, yes, but the other one will want to go on
and win by a margin. Yeah.
So it's a competitive, I guess the question around some
of the animal welfare concerns is that if, if,
if the the metric is applied to dogs, I guess, you know,
does the same metric or should it apply to horses as well?
Absolutely. And what might that mean
for the racing industry?
I don't quite understand the question, sorry.
I, I guess if, if the same concerns are
around dogs racing, uh, they might be transferred
to horses racing as well. Yeah,
I think, yeah, I, I think that's a very real possibility,
um, that the dogs is a stepping stone
and anti animal activist will look to move on
to the next industry after we are gone as well.
So, so you'd propose
that we make sure we have good animal welfare standards
for both dogs and for horses?
Absolutely. Thank you.
So Joseph Linwood? Yeah. Hi.
Going, thanks Dan for that submission
and, um, great photograph
in, in your written submission as well.
You already done very proud
Few kgs ago.
Yeah.
That, um, and you, you spoke about the, um,
the financial impact
and in your written submission you said the motion went
impact be even greater
and I, I certainly felt that in this mission today.
But, um, could you just talk to us a bit about, uh,
what assets you sort
of ballpark figure if you're comfortable, what,
what assets you're looking at losing as a consequence
of this and what your annual income,
uh, you're looking at losing?
Yeah, well there's um, obviously vehicles that are sort
of specially made to transport greyhounds kennel blocks
that have been built, um, vials of semen
for breeding personally.
And I'm only a small fish in a big pond,
but I'd probably looking 40 to 50,000 maybe.
And it would, is that annual assets?
Ah, no, that's probably assets and investments.
Um, I couldn't really give you an annual,
Sorry. Thanks
Ingrid. Yeah,
Just really noting the mental health concerns you
and others have raised, um,
because it does seem a fairly quick and blunt closure.
Um, and in labor we like to talk about just transitions.
I'm wondering in your mind,
what would you see if we did have
to close down the industry, what would be a fair amount
of time and what other support would you like both in terms
of career transferable skills
and mental health support for those who will be impacted?
Yeah, it's sort of a tough question.
Uh, obviously mental health's a big thing in New Zealand
already as a whole,
and I think maybe we struggle in that department already
as it is without putting any more strain on it.
Um, compensation, definitely
maybe looking at opening pathways
for people into new careers
or helping them down that avenue.
So it might be something like some guidance
and coaching bespoke to people to see
what transferable skills they might have.
Do you think that will help alleviate some
of the burden if there's also a longer transition time?
Uh, absolutely. Thank you.
Uh, sorry. Uh, Pam. Yeah.
Um, Dan, how do you feel about the,
the rehoming, um, role going
to the Greyhound Racing Transition Agency?
That is a scary thought.
Um, not overly comfortable with it.
I think it would be, what we've got now is working
hugely successfully.
I think it would be anyone's best interest
to look at maintaining those rehoming agencies
and leaving it to what we know. Yeah.
Thank you. Further questions.
Uh, well, um, thank you very much, Daniel.
I really appreciated your thank you submission.
Uh, we're gonna move on now to a Zoom submission
from the Coalition for the Protection of Grads
and, uh, Harry Roth and Fire.
It's just gonna be audio. Okay. Is he hooked in?
So are you there, Harry?
Hello? Um, I am, yes, apologies.
Uh, I don't have video so you can hear me,
but unfortunately you can't see me
or maybe that's fortunate for you.
Right. Um, so welcome to the select committee.
You, uh, scheduled for 10 minutes if you want questions
to be asked, ask that you bear that in mind, um, uh,
in the length of your presentation so far away.
Okay. Thank you. Look, firstly, thank you
for the opportunity to be, uh, involved in this process.
Uh, the coalition, uh,
congratulates the New South Wales government on the bill,
which does reflect 75% of, uh,
new Zealanders views.
Um, our submission showed data that makes it very clear.
There's really nothing that can be done
to make greyhound racetracks safe.
It doesn't matter how many millions of dollars
or tens of million of dollars you spend on it,
even straight tracks, greyhounds will still die
and, um, be injured.
So the coalition supports the bill, uh, in full,
we have some additional comments.
So, um, one of them, uh, is around, uh, consider
banning the export of greyhounds overseas
or their reproductive material.
Um, we think there's some welfare concerns, uh,
that might be realized if, if that is allowed.
Uh, we also believe that, uh, a ban on
gambling on overseas ground racing, uh,
should be considered by the New Zealand government.
And, and another concern we have is, um, we note
that the definition, definition of greyhounds, um,
will not include greyhounds
that have been considered to be rehomed.
Um, our concern about that is, uh, evidence
that we found here in Australia where greyhounds are rehomed
to third parties to then find ways to disappear.
Those greyhounds and evidence published, um,
compliance evidence published
by regulators here in Australia that we've analyzed shows
that people do that, uh,
and dogs have been found are killed, um, all sorts of ways.
And, um, uh, so that's a fact,
and I guess that's a concern that we have, uh,
that New Zealand takes steps to prevent that from happening.
Um, so really, I just want to reiterate
what we put in our submission, uh,
but, um, make myself available
for questions for the committee.
So, um, happy to take questions. Thank you. Uh,
We've got a question from Joseph Mooney.
Yeah, thank you. Um, look, I just want to just check
because I, you, your written submission, um, starts
with an acknowledgement to people in place in Australia
and then you, you talk about, um, members across Australia
and calling Australia state government
and sort of sort of very focused on Australia.
Where are you based?
Uh, personally I am based in, uh, uh,
new South Wales regional New South Wales.
But we have members all over the country.
Uh, and I guess our, our thought
behind the submission was there's a lot of data
that we have here, uh, which might be, um, useful
to consider, um, when making the sort of decisions
that the New Zealand government is about to make.
Um, hopefully that answers your question.
Uh, Cameron Yeah, thank you.
Um, I've just got a quick, so in the executive summary,
I mean, a part of the submission
where you do actually touch on New Zealand,
you talk about certainly 5%
of New Zealand's support shut down
of the greyhound racing industry.
Do you think that, um, if a majority of people, uh, want
to do something that is a reason to do it,
or does there need to be strong evidence, um,
and justice weighed up behind that?
Well, firstly, I think the evidence is there,
and it has been for some time, uh, in, um,
both jurisdictions New Zealand and Australia.
Uh, and I think the New Zealand industry has been put on
notice more than once.
Um, and, uh,
but obviously, um, in, in considering a transition period,
uh, you'd have to also make sure, uh, you look
after the welfare of the people involved
and, um, that there are opportunities to retrain
and find other opportunities.
Um, there's been, um, the Australian Capital Territory
shut down the industry back in 2018,
and they had a transition plan,
which is available on the website.
So there are, there are precedents of how this can be done,
uh, both providing support, uh, to the people,
uh, in the industry.
Uh, and that's both financial training and, and, and,
and mental health support as well as, uh,
welfare of the animals.
Um, and so just up on that chair Yes.
Um, one, your answer just now, you've, you've uh, mentioned
that the racing industry's been quite put on notice.
Um, have you read the October, 2023 racing industry board
report on, um, adequate
or good measures against, um, multiple measures
of animal welfare and others in the
greyhound racing industry in New Zealand?
I'm aware of it. I've, um, read some of it,
but I, I, I couldn't say
that I'm fully familiar with it. No,
Thank you. Uh, did you ever
stop Damian on the minor questionnaire?
Was it was on tracks? Oh, um, so, uh, Steve, go to you.
Yeah. Um, can I just clarify, you are not suggesting that,
uh, shifting dogs overseas for rehoming is a problem
because I know that's a certain certainly already done
and there seems to be pretty significant evidence that
that's an effective way of rehoming.
We have dogs going
to the United States, for example, from here.
You have no issue with that. That would
Be a illegal, um, what we do, we do, we have, uh, found,
uh, a number of dogs that have been, um, injured
or died on in the pro, uh, in transport.
Um, it is a stressful process
and I think there's also some question marks about
that particular program, about
how quickly the dogs end up in a home versus,
uh, in kennels.
And, and we've, we've put those concerns,
um, on our website.
But, um, look, our main concern is, uh,
greyhounds ending up back in a racing industry,
whether it's regulated
or not, uh, in another country
that might have different welfare laws to
what, uh, New Zealand has
Got one more so on that.
Yep. Ah, it's actually to do with their death statistics.
I wanna ask a different question.
Uh, is that alright with you Damien?
'cause Damian was, yeah.
You, you've got, your analysis suggests that almost half
of Greyhounds that race in New Zealand during 24
to 25 were injured.
Um, I wonder if you can expand on
how you got to that figure.
'cause we'd like to ask greyhounds New Zealand on their
response to that as well, but how did you get to that figure
that, that it's that high?
So, so this is a common tactic.
Uh, it's also applied by, uh, regulators here in Australia
where they take the number of starters.
And what that means is if a Greyhound has raced 10
or 20 times in that particular reporting period,
let's say 12 months, then that Greyhound is not lighting up
as one, they're lighting up as 10 or 20.
So, um, off the top of my head, I think the number
of starters in the last reporting period in New Zealand was
over 30,000.
So the way that the data has been, uh, presented
by Grand Racing New Zealand in their annual report was
to divide the injuries via, uh, the figure
that's more than 30,000, which
of course is gonna give you a small number.
Now, looking at, um,
how many individual greyhounds actually raced in
that period, it was around 1500.
So if you divide the injuries, so total number of injuries
by number of unique individual dogs that raised,
in other words, 1500,
obviously you get a very different number.
So by using the number of starters, you're actually
deflating the injury rate, making it look much,
much smaller than what it actually is.
Uh, so that's, that's, uh,
a concern we've got in general about how this is reported.
And, and we found this in other jurisdictions once we've
done the analysis, the real rate is actually quite,
uh, much, much higher.
Uh, and this obviously includes not just deaths
or serious injuries, but also minor injuries.
But the fact is still, um, a lot in
of greyhounds, a lot more greyhounds, uh, suffer injuries,
uh, than what, um, using the number of starters,
um, would indicate. I hope that makes sense.
Yes, it does. Damian, Look, thank you very much and,
and in your submission here, you um,
give some stats on straight tracks.
Um, and, but you also point to the fact
that actually the dogs racing on strike tracks in Australia
are usually younger or older dogs
and I guess being less experienced,
they're probably more prone to
injuries into accidents anyway.
Would you accept that?
Oh, that's a good question.
I'm not sure that I can answer that. Um,
I haven't In your, you did, you made reference to
that in your submission,
so I'm guessing you had done some analysis on it.
Yes, we have. So in
that particular circumstance that's, that's true.
Um, but more broadly across all racing tracks,
I don't know if that's, if that's,
if that stands out. Well,
I guess my question is, if, if you had, uh,
more experience dogs, um, you know,
that's the mainstream dogs racing, so not the younger
and not the older, then would the entry rate on straight
tracks be far less?
That's a good question. I'm not sure that I can answer it.
Um, but if, uh, keep, keep in mind too, uh, we've only, um,
had, uh, straight tracks are only fairly recent,
so we haven't got a lot of data,
so we probably need more data on that.
But yes, as you said, um, if that sta if
that statistic stands up over time, then that might be one
that might be one, um, mitigating, um, factor.
But we certainly wouldn't be saying that
that would eliminate their syringe injuries
because the, uh, rates are certainly high enough
to make that unlikely.
Okay. Look, thanks, I appreciate that. Just one, one
Question. No, we've got time. We've run out.
No, we've just got one.
No, we're finished. So sorry.
Uh, Harry, we've come to the end of your time
and um, thanks for your presentation
Damage.
He runs a touch.